[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Good morning, everyone. Can you hear me? All right. In the back. Thumbs up.

Yeah. Thank you. Nice to see you all survived your first week and, uh, made it back for, uh, for stats this morning.

And, uh, hope to see you all later this afternoon for the best time slot until 630 for multi-agent systems.

Hopefully you can make it that long. Um, today we are getting much more into stats.

I think a lot of this should be a bit of a refresher and a bit of new material.

Today we are going to cover. Things that you covered in stats one.

Like what is the population versus the sample?

We're going to go over different sampling methods and remind you a bit about the difference between sample statistics and population parameters.

Before we get into how we estimate these and on confidence intervals,

this will set us up for next week where we're getting into hypothesis testing and

correlation analysis before we get into regression and things like that later on.

You can see that a bit here. If you look at our modules, um, we're only here in week two, but we'll get into these, uh, next time.

So I heard that there was quite some attendance, uh, with the practical sessions.

Uh, did you have enough time to do the p zero in there?

We felt like enough time. Okay. Um, we're, uh, we're trying this, uh, format.

And, you know, hopefully we'll we'll plan that these exercises have enough time to be done within those, uh, sessions.

If things go long, you know, we'll be sure to, to account for that, to accommodate if needed.

Um, any questions or.

Anyone had some time to think a bit about this course and the syllabus and how things run?

Anyone have any logistical or admin things before we swap over to Lukla?

No. Okay, well, as always, you can, uh, chat with me on the break, uh, or shortly after class.

Um. There will be a short announcement from, um.

A colleague asked if they could talk to you all a bit about the rugby team, so they will come in during our part of our break.

Um. Just a heads up, so it's not a surprise.

All right. If you could please join me here on clap.

You can scan. You can, uh, type in the link and the code.

And, uh, once I see enough of you have joined, we'll go to the first question.

About five for you today. And we're stuck down here in the windowless room.

It's not as nice as, uh, the one from last week. I think that's about everyone that's in here.

All right, let's check out the first one. So what type of sampling is most commonly used in cognitive and social science in a university setting?

I think I, uh, set the timer a bit wrong on this one.

I could spend 50 minutes on this question.

Hopefully I got it right on the next ones. All right.

I'll give you about, uh, five more seconds if you're just coming in.

You can still type in the code, uh, at the link on top.

Or if you ask, I'll show the QR code again quickly. All right, let's see what you thought.

Okay, so this is good. Uh, you know, this was from the reading for today, and we're going to talk about this material.

Um. Some of these are have partial truth to them.

Um. Opportunity sampling.

Uh, well, we'll, um, but we will unpack all of this, but let's talk about convenient sampling.

How many of you have, uh, say in for some course credits or as a requirement for your program?

You have participated in some research studies? Yeah. Did you learn anything when you participate in there?

Maybe. Maybe you had fun. Maybe it was really boring.

Maybe it inspired you to do research.

Well, you all are in our programs and you are a convenient sample because we have access to us students to participate in research.

Um, and we'll talk about how we kind of define these more in a bit.

A random sample is what we actually would prefer to have, right?

So if you look around at the other students in your cohort, you all share some common characteristics, right?

You're all studying the same, uh, degree program.

Your maybe have some similar interests. You know, this isn't a totally random sample.

There isn't, you know, a wide range of ages in the class.

For example, um, opportunity is, uh, maybe if I stood outside of class when you were leaving and asked you, hey,

will you fill in this questionnaire or will you come participate in my study, that sort of opportunity, in a moment.

There are some convenience to it. And volunteer. Um, you do volunteer?

Of course.

So I see why a lot of you, uh, put that you do choose what you get to sign up for, um, and you're allowed to quit, uh, any study at any time.

But the real way that we define it is convenient sample. And we'll come back to these in the lecture today.

For the next one. Well sorry I spoilt that one.

Also got the timing wrong on there. So let's say. Well, what's the most common goal for, uh, empirical work and statistics?

Sorry. I'm, uh, getting mixed up in CSI using statistics.

For you right now. You know, it might be you want to use statistics to earn your degree.

Learn some data analytic techniques to, uh, do your research.

To do your thesis. Um, but as it was already revealed by accident, uh, you know,

we want to use knowledge of our sample that we collect to make an inference about the population.

So sorry about that. Let's see if I get it right this time.

Here we go. So if we replicate a study 20 times, how many studies will not have?

Or we'll have a mean that's not included in the 95% confidence interval.

And, uh, I guess I'm showing the this one live.

Kind of biasing your input maybe could be right because you.

Give you about ten more seconds for the last few.

All right, so most of you got this right. There isn't 95 observations in 20.

So that one we can certainly rule out, um.

We're going to talk about confidence intervals again.

And we're going to talk about some parts that go into this like the sampling distributions sampling distribution of the mean.

How do we get to this idea that, uh, that studies would have this kind of result or would not if, uh, with regard to our confidence intervals.

So we're going to dive into that today. So how about this one.

So we use sample statistics to do which of the following regarding population parameters.

Anyone remember this one. Only about 44 minutes left to answer this one.

All right. Last chance for, uh, a guess if you have one. Oh, great.

So a lot of you said estimate, right. We're going to try to estimate from our sample what that population parameter is.

If you said differentiate there could be some cases like we talked a little bit about like

paired sample t test where we're trying to differentiate some samples from each other,

but we're still trying to estimate what that difference might be in, in the population.

Okay. Last one. So as we increase our sample size, the sampling distribution of the mean becomes which of the following.

Does it get more normal wider skewed or more narrow narrower sampling distribution of the mean.

Ten more seconds. All right.

Oh, okay. So this is what we're going to unpack today.

If you were looking at the distribution of the data, if you have, uh, more sample size, you will get a more normal distribution.

But when we're taking the sampling distribution of the mean, we're getting a lot of samples,

and we're getting the mean of those in the mean, uh, of that distribution actually gets narrower.

That gives us this idea that we get more precision on our estimate of the population parameter.

So we're going to look at this today.

Um, if you have, you know, your laptop with you and are ready, load it up to go that we will have a few exercises today,

uh, that we're going to look at together to try to unpack some of these, uh, questions that we started with.

But I'll start with, uh, some lecture first. But are there any questions about these questions?

Or ready to just wait to see the slides related to this?

Okay, so before I put these on. Can anyone give me an example of what a population might be, any populations that you might study?

You have one? Yeah. Oh.

CSI students? Sure. Yeah. Did you have one, too?

I did point that. Yeah. No.

Uh. Um. Yeah, probably. Yeah.

Could be just a certain type of animal, right? Uh, um, so we've got CSI students.

Would that be the current cohort or all CSI students at the university or all in the world?

Uh, any other ideas? What kind of populations might you be interested in?

Those are good examples to start. Some that I had on my, uh, slides here to.

So we could say, well, we're really interested in, uh, you know, all of the undergraduate CSI students at the university.

Um, so maybe we sample some of you to participate in our research, and we're trying to see what makes, uh, CSI, CSI students amazing.

Uh, rather than getting everyone because I'm not sure about you,

but even getting all of the students to participate in a study or fill in course evaluations, that's a really tough one.

So when we do course evaluations, also, we're getting a sample to estimate how how good was the class?

Did the students, uh, learn from it? Um, but we could think about all students studying a similar topic around the world.

So that would be more than just at this university, but all other universities.

Uh, we could want to study all Dutch people as our population.

Um, people who play an instrument. Maybe. We think there's something interesting about people who play an instrument.

And we want to know something about that population. About anyone in life used to play video games and VR or any biological organism.

Uh, this question is important, uh, because, well, many times we don't think about what is this population we're trying to understand.

We often think get into this routine of just sampling.

We get our convenient sample, and we try to make some inference from that sample.

But who is the population? I think last time we talked a little bit too, about, um, maybe certain people who may have a rare condition.

They might you might have access to that entire population if there's only 2 or 3 people in the world with this,

then you don't need to really do any inferential statistics, but you just have access to the whole population.

Yeah. You know. So what would the population be in that example?

Yeah that's a great example. So and I'm a bit human centric with my examples of populations or living organism centric.

But it doesn't have to be. You could think of uh, text and sampling from uh, text or other disciplines, you know,

we'll sample different types of things to try to estimate whatever their population is.

So that's a great example of why it's important to ask, what is your population you're trying to make an inference about?

So a population here is some collection of units.

Right. Whether that's people applying to implant subsidiary literary text.

And we want to generalise some set of our findings using some statistical models.

Uh. Yeah. We want to generalise.

What does that mean? Generalised. Right. That we think this is something that tends to be the case.

It's reliable. There's some margin of error. But we're pretty confident that it's likely to be the case.

Um, on the question that I had earlier, I said, what's what is it that we tried to do, uh, with regard to our population parameters from our sample?

And one of those was proof that anyone put that one, I don't remember.

So often I still see someone does one study and they say they prove something to be true.

And that's really a wrong interpretation of what the inferential statistics will tell us.

We can't really prove anything, but we can provide evidence that something is likely to be the case.

And we'll get back into this sort of logic that, uh, statistical inference rests on much more, uh, next week with our hypothesis testing.

Um, but anyway, so we have our population and we have our sample, usually smaller, hopefully the representative of your population,

uh, and it's some subunits from that population that we want to determine if there's something true about them or likely to be true.

Right. So we often can't observe all of our.

People or text in our population. Maybe we could, but that's the reason for sampling.

So when we're doing empirical work and CSI, we're thinking about how can we use our knowledge about that sample that we've collected data on,

uh, to make some inference about our target population? Hopefully everyone remembers descriptive statistics.

You know, those were things like our means and standard deviations.

You gave some examples last week.

Um, if we had our full population, you could really just say, well, the average response to question seven on this survey was,

you know, five and a half and you don't have to make an inference about it because you you have your whole population.

But again, we often don't.

So we would say, what can we say about the average response to question seven for the population, given the sample that we've observed?

So I'm mostly just kind of saying the same thing several different ways.

Hopefully it will stick. Let's look now at, uh, some sampling methods.

So this is really simple right. So here we have letters uh a through J from the alphabet.

So we're going to use this toy example that it's our our population.

We want to study. It's not even the full alphabet. Right.

Um, just these uh few letters and some of them are sort of filled in circles, and some of them are empty circles.

And if we take a sample of four observations from these without replacement.

Can anyone tell me what it means without replacement? Yeah.

In the back. Exactly.

So if we had with replacement, then, you know, impossible.

It would be possible that we could get a four times, right?

Uh, maybe not that likely or not that probable. Based on what we learned last week.

Um, but in this case. So as we take out each observation, you know, there's fewer and fewer to choose from when we don't have replacement.

So we could get some samples like this. Do you think these are representative of our population?

Or are any of them more or less representative? So if we had two.

Two filled in circles. Then we're kind of thinking, okay, maybe it's 5050 in the population, but it would.

Would that be likely to be true? Apologies for that.

Uh, luckily I uh muted in time so. Um, well, it's not that it's not that clear.

Right. So it isn't a 5050 split, but are they representative or not?

Well, we could ask questions about that. Uh, if we had simple random sampling.

Again, this is what we what do we really want to have?

But it's not often the case that we actually get simple random sampling.

Now, even with this idea of randomness in our computer today,

we're going to do like random sampling from some normal distributions and things like that.

If you're if you want to kind of, uh, go down a rabbit hole about, can we really have randomness in computers?

There's some evidence that it's not. It's really pseudo random, but often for our statistical inference purposes, it's close to random enough.

Now, this is a contrast to the example I showed you before.

Would you think these samples are representative? Probably not.

Right. You you would want to see something more like this.

Like, okay, maybe it's about half or there's some variety in the sample.

Uh, whereas if you got these cases this is again without replacement, but only pulling out those.

Uh, filled in circles. Uh, seems like there would be a problem.

And this would be a good example of bias sampling. Right?

So there's some sort of bias in how you are sampling that pulled out only these type of observations,

where you had the filled in circles and not the variety that were in that population.

Can any of you think of like what might be a source of bias when you're sampling?

Okay. Yeah. In the back. Yeah.

So if you didn't hear, you know, you're a university student, so you're maybe more highly educated, I hope then, uh, just the general public.

Um, and there's, there's a lot of research, actually, that goes into a lot of university research.

And it's the the weird acronym. Have any of you heard of it?

Weird. A few of you. Western education.

Educated, industrialised. Uh, what are they?

What's the R&D? Anyone remember? Uh, yeah.

Thank you. Yeah. So, uh, so those things could be a source of bias, right?

That that's something some information, like why we report demographics when we, uh,

when we report on our research so that people can interpret those results within the context of which they were sampled from.

Although there's some, uh. Ethical concerns.

Two now with having a lot of personal information and reported in your paper.

So if you, uh, work on your ethics application here to do some research, they'll ask you, do you really need this demographic information?

Is it part of your, uh, research question, or is it something that, you know, might give an unnecessary risk for your participants?

Um. Okay. So. Here is an example where we just have simple random sampling but with replacement.

So again you could get, you know, multiple observations of the same letter.

Um, but this wouldn't typically be something we would ever want to do, right?

With our normal type of inference that we're going to make. Um.

But it's good to still realise that that's a possibility. So that's often why we might exclude someone from participating in a study twice.

They've already know how the study goes, they would be biased and so on.

So I have a short exercise for you to just try to think about these simple samples.

So. I have an idea here for you to create a variable called pop, which is short for a population that has the letters A through J.

So a bit of recall of some programming. How are you going to put, uh, these letters A through J in a variable?

There's a couple of ways. Uh, try to create a sample by this.

From this you can call it sample one using the sample function.

And you insert that variable into it, another sample uh with replacement.

And then see if you can think of a way to add bias into your sampling method.

How would you do that if you were trying to program it.

That will only draw the black or filled in letters A, B, G, and H and try to make a third variable for that.

So I have a few exercises today.

I'll give you a couple of minutes to get started on this, and I'll come, uh, check in with you before we'll look at some ideas for this together.

And if you don't have a laptop with you, maybe you have a neighbour that you can, uh, look, look at theirs, or think along with them.

All right, I, uh. If you didn't finish this one, it's a good thing to try.

Uh, later on, some of you did get finished, or we're still remembering how to do things in art.

Uh, this one, I guess, is already available, this script.

But usually I just make them available right after lecture so that you see my solution after I show it to you.

Um, but there was at least two ways you could create this variable, uh,

using this letters function and referring through the first ten letters, or some of you also, you know, spelled them out manually.

Um, and if we run this, you know, we get our different, uh, characters strings and we can take a sample, um, and take a look at those real quick.

So here I'm getting, you know, hopefully it's something kind of random.

In this case, I didn't get replacement, even though I said replacement, I did.

Sorry I got to use in this one. Um, and I asked you to think about bias.

Uh, so the simple way, of course, is that you could change the probabilities.

So this was an argument that you might have seen if you went to help and put in sample, which I always recommend,

because then you could see, oh, you can change the weights for obtaining certain elements.

So here I just weighted it so that all of those filled in letters had a probability of one and zero for the other ones.

Did anyone have any different ideas they came up with for for a bias?

No. There's other ways you probably could have come up with this.

You could have had different probabilities. Of course not just sort of zero and one, but somewhere in between.

Uh, you could have, uh, said you could have maybe wrote some logic,

like take out a random observation and only accept it if it meets certain conditions.

Um, something like that. Um.

Okay. Any questions? Just to get you thinking a bit about how to use the sample function, what are the arguments for it?

Um, we'll be using some of those later on to.

Let's go for it then a bit more before we have a break.

So in practice with sampling we we really want to do this random sampling.

Right. So we want to have something where every member of the population has this sort of equal chance of being selected to be in the sample.

Um. But you know, very large samples can can be random.

But you really it's really difficult to get the resources or access for having a truly random sample,

even when we, uh, program them into our computers to maybe it's not truly random.

Uh, but that's sort of what would be the the ideal case.

Um, sometimes we might be interested in, uh, making sure that our sample is, uh, sort of meeting certain criteria.

So maybe I'm interested in studying, like, ageing and development.

Right. And then it's important that I get young people, middle aged people, older people within my sample.

That would be an example of stratified sampling. So you might or you might do in this case it's giving one for uh different nationalities.

Um, so this is sort of making sure that your sample is.

Pulling specifically from different people have certain characteristics or data that have certain characteristics.

Volunteer sampling is just asking people to participate.

You could run like an ad online or or something like that and see who responds.

So that's a bit different than we have access to the student pool.

And you do volunteer to participate in a particular study.

It's more of something that goes out in mass and people respond to it.

Opportunity sampling. Uh, my train was just delayed getting here.

Maybe as soon as I was getting out of the train, someone asked me, oh, do you want to fill in a survey about your experience on the train?

Uh, you know, that would be just because I happened to be in that spot.

Particularly inconvenienced. Uh, that that would be an opportunity sample.

So these are all types of sampling that you can use.

And when you're thinking about your research design, uh, it's it's you you can get to choose those.

Right. Sometimes we go with just what is most convenient because we have access to a student pool.

Um, but other times you would have to think about this when you're designing it,

where you get the right participants or sample to make an estimate about your population.

And you can also use it to critique, uh, a study as well.

Right? So if you read some study and you see, okay, well, you were just doing opportunity sampling,

but you're trying to make claims like this applies to the whole population.

Is that really true or not? So convenient.

Sampling is something like what? What we talked about earlier.

Here's a researcher, maybe that's me. And there's a lot of students around so I can ask you to volunteer to participate.

Um, but it may not be totally right. Sorry. Uh, may not be totally representative of the population.

Um, but we could also add snowball sampling.

So sometimes if you study people and, uh, with a certain condition, uh, that is sort of hard to get access to.

Usually they know someone else. Uh, so you can get them to help you find other people.

One example I think, that is supposed to be shown here is maybe with pregnant people.

If you were trying to study something about pregnancy, uh, then they, you know, maybe they go to, uh,

courses on pregnancy or things like that, and you can get access to more of that type of population.

But again, these ones are not truly random. But maybe what you need to do in order to get access to a sample.

So you might be asking, uh, does your sampling method matter?

And as with most answers that I give in science, it depends.

So it depends on what is your actual target population.

Right. Are you. Where where are you? Uh, where are you trying to generalise to?

Is it? Everyone is. It's only certain subsets of people.

And is there a bias in your sample? And if so, what way?

So even if you have a bias, is the phenomenon that you're, uh, interested in studying, do you think it still might vary randomly in your sample?

So let's say we study only university students.

Um, but they all have very different interests. And I'm looking at interest and something else.

You know, if you think it's still likely to be randomly, uh, represented in them,

then it still could be you can still make a valid inference from that.

So again, here,

what's often essential is measure and report diversity in your sample and be transparent about your sample and how they were recruited.

So I just want you to think about this a bit more with a short discussion activity.

So maybe talk with the person next to you.

Um, about which subsampling method you think might be most appropriate for each of these four examples.

And then I'll ask you to, uh, to share with me. This case.

So what do you all think about the first example?

Perceptions of different age populations of a virtual agent helping with health issues.

What kind of sampling do you think would be appropriate here?

You know. You want to know how people of different ages.

Yeah, that's a good. So that fits with what we talked about with stratified exam uh, sampling that uh, we could choose okay.

We are interested in these age groups and make sure our sample has, you know, a representative selection from those different groups.

Did anyone think of a different type of sampling for this one?

So you could. Of course, if you don't know, uh, if you don't know how to stratified,

you could just try to get a, uh, convenient sample and hope that there's a variety of age groups.

But if you really want to look at something that's sort of equally balanced across age groups, uh, then you would want to try a stratified hip.

What about, uh, children with autism spectrum disorder and how they learn social skills from a robot?

Any ideas for this one? Yeah. Volunteer.

Want to elaborate a bit? Yeah.

So they would need to self-select if they saw an advertisement and then they could could volunteer.

Uh, any other ideas? For that one?

Yeah, in the back. Yeah, exactly.

So maybe they're in a network, uh, already for, uh, weather.

That's already some kind of skills training or anything like that.

And, uh, then they might be able to snowball. Simple. Uh. Good example.

Yeah. Okay. Uh, how about, uh, cognitive capacities associated with better problem solving performance?

Yeah, I think that's such a broad question.

Because otherwise we, uh, tend to have a certain bias.

In what? Because such a. Like.

Yeah. So we could go for random sampling. And what kind of bias and what do we have if we did convenient sampling.

The same be here? Yeah. That's right.

So maybe there are hours in the university, for example.

We tend to. Uh. More often people access to better education.

But the research question is specific to those.

Yeah. Go around. I think that's a good example.

So I'm trying to think of if we have this bias, what would it look like?

Let's just say if problem solving performance is our outcome variable and we have, you know,

a distribution of how good someone is at solving a problem, maybe it's sort of time it takes to solve the problem,

for example, as a performance measure, if we go with convenient sampling and we're biased in the way that you just shared,

what, what what might we miss in our distribution? Maybe it sort of shifted, right?

Like if we if we think that this. People have a general.

If the prediction is that maybe there's maybe you all are better at problem solving on average than those who do not study CSI, for example, right?

So then the idea there might be that there's this kind of systematic shift and, uh,

sort of what the average problem solving ability is that if you're missing out

on these other people that aren't in your sample because it's not truly random,

then you might, uh, you might have that, uh, limitation in their.

Were you here for? Uh, quick introduction for the rugby.

No. Are you just late? Uh, okay. All right. Now, I was expecting, uh, them to come by at 1130.

Uh, so, uh, no one is here to talk about, uh, rugby.

No. Let's have a break, then. Uh, so, how are you all feeling?

Let's do a quick vote. Should we take 15 minutes today?

Ten minutes. Five.

No break at all. Uh, I think that was a really kind of even split.

Uh, I think we'll do ten and still plan to end five minutes early.

So let's start back at, uh, 11, uh, 45.

All right, so that's our ten minutes. I think a few more people will still be coming back, but, uh,

I'll keep going forward since we want to make sure to also, uh, and five minutes early for having a shorter break.

Um, so why do we talk about sampling, right.

Because that's kind of every basically every sample that we're going to analyse in this course.

You know, it had something that went into how that sample was, uh, designed and collected.

And we're going to be using estimates from our sample, uh, to try to, uh,

we're trying to get these estimates from our sample to understand our population.

That's the whole thing that we're going to be doing. Now, it's important to keep in mind, uh, that you may see different symbols, uh,

when you're seeing something refer to a population parameter versus a sample statistic.

Apologies for the resolution. When you blow it up that big, it looks kind of poor quality.

Sorry about that. Um, but you see, for example, mu is the population parameter for the mean versus x bar is the sample mean.

Uh sigma versus s for standard deviation.

So when you see some of these equations uh, you know it's important to keep in mind whether that's from your sample or your population parameter.

Now I had already another exercise here.

Maybe what I will do is, uh, just show you this one so we can go save some time today for the for a couple of the other ones.

Um, so we looked last week at, uh, these sort of distribution functions.

This is the one referring to the normal distribution in the, ah, in front is getting some random sampling from that distribution.

So we're not using sample anymore because we have this function that's already saying here's a distribution.

Draw some random values from it. But we have to define how many values.

So that's n of 100 or 1000 or 10,000.

We define the mean, though, in the standard deviation and following our text.

This is meant to be some sort of general IQ scores.

Um, maybe before I run anything here, I'm wondering if you have any, um, any predictions?

For the mean and standard deviation. So as we increase our sample size here.

What do we think we will see for the mean if we know that these are the the values that the distributions are based on.

They'll get closer to 100. So will they always be sort of less than 100, or will they be also above 100?

Ideally, they might get closer to 100. What about our standard deviation?

Should we also get closer to standard deviation of 15?

Let's take a look. So here I am.

Just, uh, make sure you can see. I'm rounding here, too, just so that we get, uh, hold values.

But we can take a look at those, uh, real quick.

So you can see what these values look like, right? Just whole number values.

The mean should be somewhere around 100. Standard deviation of 15.

Let's take a look. So for sample one this was with our uh sample above 100.

So we get a mean 100.66 and standard deviation 13.

Um, not exactly our, uh, values, but kind of close.

We increased that sample size to 1000.

Okay, we get 99.65 and 14.48.

So is it a little bit? I guess the difference is a bit less for this one.

So it's a little bit closer. And the last one with 10,000.

Also. Then again, even a bit closer. And for both of these.

So if I just make a quick plot of this, um.

This was, uh, the mean. Maybe I should have added a line here at 100 so you could see that kind of right around there.

And here's the standard deviation. So I think what you would often see is your mean estimate.

And if if you all had run this now two, maybe your plot would look different than that.

Maybe yours went a bit up on the second one or went a bit down.

Uh, but in principle it should be kind of going somewhere around that mean and getting kind of closer and closer the larger the sample.

And the same should be true as well for our standard deviation.

And why is that the case? You learned about this in stats too.

Sorry, we're in stats. Who now? And stats one.

Uh, that, you know, we should get more accurate estimates of our population parameters from larger samples.

So here just sort of like a proof of concept of this, that if you have, uh,

six sided die and you roll that, you know, up to a thousand, uh, times, uh.

At least the number of dice is up to 1000 here. Then you're getting something that goes toward three and a half.

What? Why three and a half? Yeah.

Yeah. So the average of the possible values in there should be around three and a half.

Right.

And so this is, this is if we did something like the example I just showed you, but increasing all within the possible range of values for that mean,

you know, it's it's never exactly I mean maybe there is an exact one, but it goes a bit later.

So we know there's still some error, but it should be narrow and narrower closer to that.

True. Um, population mean.

So this is why if we can, we go for larger samples.

Although we're doing convenient sampling within the time frame of a thesis, you know, then you might only have two months to get what you can.

Uh, so it might not be ideal. We'll talk a little bit more about power analysis.

Uh, in another lecture. Um, okay. So I had this question earlier on about sampling distribution of the mean.

Right. So before we had, uh, these distributions that it was just a value for the mean, right.

Sorry. Let me go back to our real quick. So I took a sample and I got a mean.

And that's what we have here for three samples. So if we want to look at sampling distribution of the mean.

That means that I. I take a sample and then I get a mean of that sample.

I take another sample and I get another mean and so on.

And so this distribution is different than just increasing the size of the sample.

It's taking more samples and getting that mean and looking at how the distribution of the mean changes.

I want you to give this one a try yourself. So, uh, we're going to use the same sample information from before.

Oh, sorry. That's the mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15.

And try to calculate the sample distribution of the mean for 100, 1010 thousand samples with a size of five.

By the histogram. So I think there's one way that you can do this using a for loop, right?

You want to pull a bunch of these samples, um, different sizes and make a histogram of them.

Uh, if you get stuck with me over and I will come give you some tips.

Uh, so you're just kind of building on what I showed here for these ones.

But then for the first example, it's using size five.

Next one you could try. Uh, different sizes.

But maybe I'll show you my solutions for those if you get started on the first part.

Did anyone struggle with this one? Yeah.

So a lot of you maybe haven't programmed much in R and, uh, earlier,

remembering how to create a variable could have been a challenge or how to do for loops and r.

Um, I would say in this class, there's not a lot of programming challenges like this one, because often we're specifying a model,

uh, where we're running a function and we write a formula to define our model, or our data are already in kind of a clean format.

So we don't do a lot of data wrangling to get it in the right format.

Although all of those things are, uh, are possible and are and often necessary.

Yeah. Well, data wrangling and Ruby on the final.

No, no programming on the final, but they're still kind of code and output in the questions you have to interpret.

Yeah. So you won't be programming on the spot. Um, but my point I was trying to make was that.

We don't do a lot of the programming part in R because we're mostly doing analyses.

But why? Why would I try to get you thinking about how to take a bunch of different samples and look at the properties of those?

Like, what kind of thing might this be useful for? No ideas.

It's not meant as an exercise in futility, that's for sure.

Um, it's to get you thinking about the stuff that I tell you, right?

I don't want you to, uh, just think for sure.

Oh, this is how it is.

And, uh, when we when we do some of these exercises, it's like, okay, well, if we see this in a stats book, let's check if we get the same thing.

If, if the law of large numbers, for example, says a distribution should look like this.

Well, let's actually test that. Let's design some ways to simulate some data and look at it ourselves.

So it's meant to kind of get you thinking a bit about how can we unpack these things so we can engage with them differently.

I find that for me, just reading something, looking at the pictures, not that really, uh, not as helpful as trying to create these sort of conditions,

uh, myself, but we had a limited time in lecture, so of course, I give you these exercises and if, if you can run with it quickly, it works well.

If not, you get a bit of time to think about how to, to approach it.

Um, so in my example here, so, so maybe the wording wasn't totally clear.

What we did before. Right. Was we did generate three different samples here with three different sample sizes.

Right. So we had these three variables. One was 100 observations, one was 1001 was 10,000.

All the same mean and standard deviation.

And now the challenge was okay I want to get 100 samples that all are sample size five with the mean 100 and standard deviation 15.

Right. So that wasn't clear uh, to everyone.

But what does that look like. Right. So we're getting a much smaller sample size than the ones we did before, but we're getting 100 of them.

So let's take a look. In this case also just for the programming part, this is the main way to write a loop.

And ah, uh, and you have to use these parentheses and brackets.

In this case I just initialised like an empty vector.

And then I'm adding in, uh, to this vector, the prior parts that were stored in it and getting the mean of, uh, of each sample.

So I will run this. And we get something that looks like this.

Looks kind of normal. Most of the value is sort of around 100.

There's some values in the tail end of the distribution.

Now if I increase this. So I'm just increasing here the number of samples that I'm pulling while keeping the sample size the same at five.

Okay. Got a little narrower. Let me just go back so you can kind of see that change a bit.

And then lastly I'll do this one 10,000. Oops.

That's not doing that. That's messing up my code. And then here a bit a bit narrower.

But they didn't change too much. Right. You see that you really have to squint to see how much they've changed, which is not much.

Okay, so the next part on there I had was changing this to 10,000.

So we're still going to do 100, 1010 thousand.

But now we have a much larger sample.

So here we get something that looks kind of strange, but notice right away the range of these values is a lot different.

So if we go back we have from 80 to 120. Here we're getting something already much narrower closer to that mean.

It takes a little longer to run. This one looks a bit more normal, but still really narrow range.

Last one taking a little longer. And it looks fairly normal with but uh, quite narrow around, uh.

The true population mean that we set. So what are we seeing?

Uh, if we go back here and take a look at this slide, we're seeing how the sampling distribution of the mean changes with sample size.

Uh, and as we increase it again, we get that narrower, narrower distribution of the mean.

Right. So we're increasing like our precision of that true population parameter.

This one with sample size of one. If we take a bunch of samples it's going to just look like the normal distribution.

But as we're getting more and more samples at a larger sample size, we'll be more precise on that mean that we're trying to estimate.

Just what's going on upstairs? Uh. Uh, so this is all based on central limit theorem.

Again, you learned about this in stats one. But we have some standard error, which is the standard deviation over the number of samples.

And that uh, with a sufficiently sized sample we should have a mean that's the same as the population mean,

a standard deviation of the sampling distribution that gets smaller as the sample

size increases and the shape of the sampling distribution becomes more normal.

So this is not the sampling distribution of the mean but just that sampling distribution of one sample.

The larger it is. So this tells us why larger experiments are more reliable, right?

If you see a study that they say, oh, I have 10,000, uh, participants in this study,

um, you probably will think intuitively that's more reliable than 100 or 20.

Um, but how much more in terms of the standard error? So the standard error comes up all the time in the things that we calculate in stats.

Uh, but it also tells us why the normal distribution is normal based on this, this property.

All right. So we have about ten minutes. So I want to make sure to uh go over confidence intervals today.

So I'm skipping this on standard error. But this is basically the exercise I showed you.

But instead of the mean calculating standard error when you're looking for something fun to do uh, over the weekend, give this a try.

Um. So whenever we are estimating our population parameters, we often just give our best guess.

And that is an estimate from our sample.

You can see the calculations for these here. Um, right now I'm not going to go into detail on this.

Uh, for the sake of time. Although you will see us referring back to these when they're included in things that we calculate,

like if we calculate correlation next week, you're going to see, well, where do we get our sample variance.

How is that built into the equation for a correlation. But they should all be things that you covered in stats one.

So I don't remember what the percentage was.

Of those that said had the right interpretation of the confidence interval on the quiz, but there was a paper from a few years ago,

uh, now, uh, so I that's, that's more than a few as 20 years ago, so older than, uh, most of you, I guess.

Yeah. Um, hopefully this has changed.

Uh, but at the time, this was kind of alarming. Right.

So you think there's all of these scientists out there doing science, hopefully applying their statistics correctly to make some inference.

And this study showed that most of them, uh, misunderstood confidence intervals.

So I hope that when you pass this class, you won't be one of those ones that misunderstand confidence intervals.

So all of what we've been talking about today is how we might design some sample to be representative of the population,

how we can look at how these properties change with we when we increase sample size or increase the number of samples.

Um, and we really want to know how can we quantify the amount of uncertainty associated with our estimates of the population parameters.

Right. So if we want to say something is likely to be the case, it's likely to be this particular value of problem solving ability, for example.

And how much sort of margin of error do we have? We often use 95%.

As sort of the chance that the true population mean lies within a certain window of values.

That's something that we often want to say. Um, it's not quite the most accurate way to interpret a confidence interval.

Um. But we would like to say something like, there's 95% chance that a normally distributed quantity lies within,

you know, about two standard deviations of the true mean.

So that's where we could look at this. Here would be our sample mean.

And we have some range around that that we're quite likely to know.

It's it's within there. So it gives us some. There's some uncertainty, but with that, uncertainty comes with how certain we actually are.

So we use confidence intervals for that. And this is based on standard error.

Uh, and these values which come from the t statistic in this or in this case it's showing an example with the normal distribution.

So if we ask for these sort of quantiles related to that we get these sort of Cut-Off values.

Although we would typically use the T distribution uh for that.

So these values are sort of just made up. It's based on how these distributions work and where the they should fall.

If you want to go into a bit more detail, there's a video here that talks about this in depth.

But the important part that that we need to get right and how we interpret it is

about what this 95% confidence interval means that if we replicated our study,

if we had repeated samples. Over and over again.

Uh, that are 95% confidence interval for each replication.

You can see, uh, that 95% of them would contain the true population mean.

So you can see an example here of replication number sort of going through 50.

And the mean of the IQ like the example we used earlier of 100.

And we see uh, you know some of those.

Uh, that do not include that true population mean.

And same thing here with different sample sizes.

So this is what the confidence interval is really about. It's not exactly a 95% chance that the confidence interval is in there.

It's about number of replications, which is interesting because a lot of times we're not really doing replication studies right.

I don't know, even for a thesis.

For example, some do a replication, but most of the time we want to do something new at least, uh, that's what we kind of build our research around.

Like no one has looked at this before. If all you do is replication, uh, it's important, but it's, uh, not sort of cutting edge, uh, work.

Does this confidence interval interval stuff make sense?

So if I go back here just briefly, you know, this would be taking our mean from our sample.

And the confidence interval is plus or minus this critical value 1.96 times that standard deviation over the square root of the sample size,

which is uh, this value we get back here standard error.

So when when you report your stats later on in the course and you tell me what the meanness of something,

or you tell me this is the size of the correlation or the size of the regression coefficient,

I always want to know what's the confidence interval around that.

Right. And there's going to be important things when you test your correlation for example of if zero is

contained within that confidence interval then you know there may not actually be a correlation.

So you can already make an inference of how, uh, related to your hypothesis of whether you have like a non-zero correlation or not.

Right. So if you want to say something's correlated, it needs to be correlated greater than zero.

But if zero is in your confidence interval, then you know there's a chance in the population that it's, uh, zero.

We'll come back to that more uh, next week. So I have an example here also for calculating confidence intervals and ah.

Uh, give this a try on your own. There isn't a practical session this week.

Sasha is presenting her work at a conference, but there is one next week, so you have a bit of extra time.

There may be one in your schedule still. So if you show up.

Well, maybe you might be the only one there.

And if you do, well, the room is still available to you, and you can, uh, you can work on some of these.

So just to sum up. Today we talked about sampling methods, different ways you could do that, how that might bias, you know,

what type of interpretations you can make about your population,

how we estimate population parameters from sample statistics, um, and also confidence intervals.

So for next week we're going to go into hypothesis testing and introduction to correlation.

Um so there's a required reading from this um chapter six.

And uh, other than that I will see you later tonight I think, or this afternoon for multi-agent systems.

If not, then next week. Thanks.

