[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Uh, hopefully you don't forget. About that one.

I don't know if. Yeah. Oh.

Yeah. Yeah.

Good afternoon. I think it's afternoon. Yep.

Can you hear me? All right. In the back? Yeah, it's kind of loud in here.

We are here for some more correlation today.

We got almost to correlation last week. If you remember we stopped at covariance.

So I will kind of pick up just a few slides back from where we ended last week.

Uh, before we get to our actual correlation coefficient.

Um, and after we cover this material today, we're going to be moving into regression.

There's of course a connection between correlation and regression.

I'll point out a bit today, but then you can see lots of regression for the next month's, uh, month and a half or so, all regression stuff.

So, uh, it's going to be hopefully you'll be really big fans of regression by the end.

Otherwise, you may be sick of it, but, uh, let's see how it goes.

Um, first, I have just a few questions for you today.

Um. We'll clap. Three questions. Maybe some tricky ones will see how it goes.

I'll give you, uh, a minute or so to, uh, get ready.

Hello. Come on in. Come on in.

We're just about to start the first question. I.

Shall I give you a second to, uh, to scan? Yeah. Okay.

Hello. Oh, yeah.

Yeah. All right. We're going to go on to the first one. If you just came in you can still type in the code after.

So which of the following test statistics do we use to test the hypothesis and the Pearson's correlation?

We look at d, r, t or f in Pearson correlation.

Almost everyone's in. I'll give you ten more seconds for the last few.

All right. Oh, that one looks painful.

So so r is the correlation coefficient for Pearson.

But the test statistic is t from the t distribution.

We didn't cover it yet but it was in the reading. Uh but I will go back over this today.

Uh f or d d is in the test statistic.

It was an effect size we used. Um, so for the two of you who got this right.

Nice job. How about this one?

This one? You might have to do a bit of calculation. So researcher analyses the relationship between income in euros and years of education,

finding a covariance of €500 a year given a standard deviation of annual income is 10,000,

and the standard deviation of years is two years of education.

What do you think the correlation is? I'll give you a bit longer to reread this and see how you would calculate it from the information.

If anyone wants a calculator, someone left one behind here. All right.

I'll give you about ten more seconds to put in your answer or your guess.

All right. Okay.

So the majority not that answer did get this one right.

So we didn't get to what to do with our taco variation.

Last week we ended right with the correlation value.

Still haven't figured out how to stop this from popping up even though all notifications are off.

But, uh, that's my life right now. Um, yeah.

So how do how do we get here? What do we have to do with our covariance?

Some of you got it right. Anyone? What did you do here? Any volunteers or was it just a wild guess?

I heard someone talking about. It's like over in this direction.

Yeah. Yes.

Yeah. So we take the product of the two standard deviations here, and we divide our covariance value by the what.

What's another word for that. Anyone know what we could call it?

Uh, standardising. And we are going to look at that as well today.

If you put this one. This should have been the easy one to rule out, because we said last time the correlation goes from positive 1 to -1.

So we should know that something outside that range is the easy one to get rid of.

So does that make sense? So if we take 500 and we divide it by 20,000, which is basically the product of these two, we will get this 0.025.

Do you think that's a strong correlation. Maybe you raise a hands medium.

Fairly weak to nonexistent correlation. Yeah, it's pretty close to zero, right?

So it's not very strong at all. Got one more question.

So which of the following would be a good reason to calculate a partial correlation coefficient?

Is that because the effect size is large, the r squared is marginal.

The data are ordinal, or to account for influence of a third variable.

Come on in. Hello.

We're just doing our last question here. About ten more seconds for your final answers.

All right. So a lot of you did get this one right.

Partial correlation. We're going to unpack that more today. But it's often that our correlation is a bivariate measure right.

We have two variables. We think they're related. But we really know the world is often more complex than that.

So in this case we know at least one third variable might be related to the might influence the relationship between two.

And a partial correlation is one way we can look at that, but we will look at it more together today.

Any questions on this before I move back to the slides?

Okay. So we were a few slides past this when we ended last week.

Right. We were looking at these this potential relationship between the number of advertisements and packets sold.

Uh, and we calculated all these deviations from the means for each variable.

Right. So we got the mean and the standard deviation.

Um, and we revisited this idea of the variance to set up the covariance.

Right. So the variance is basically the sum of the each observations difference from the mean divided by the number of observations over one.

And we square these right. So that uh, if they're positive or negative they won't be cancelling each other out.

And our covariance right was similar but expanded because we had two variables.

And we're not squaring them anymore because we're getting the product of these.

Hopefully this is a reminder of the end of last week. We looked at this example two if I recall correctly, where we then plug in each of these values,

these differences from the mean, multiply them towards each other and they're all summed up over n minus one.

So we had five observations. So four here.

And we get that 4.25. And that's where we ended right.

We said what does that mean. Well we can see that it's at least seems to be a positive value.

Um, but the problem with the covariance right, is that it's.

Always in the units of measurement that we're putting in there.

So especially if we have units of measurement that are very different between the two variables, we're correlating.

We can never actually directly interpret that covariance.

And that's why we look at the correlation coefficient, which is what we call standardising it.

So that we can look at any correlation coefficient and know what it means.

Um. I skipped over this, but I'll show you in a second.

I would rather save some time for, uh, some of the other exercises.

Um, but. So we can standardise things.

And we looked at this example already, which was basically dividing our covariance by the two standard deviations of our variables.

And that's that's simply what we do. Um.

When we're thinking about how to implement this, we're going to check it ourselves,

because we don't just want to trust the stats professor or the stats textbook.

We want to make sure things work as they should do.

So in this case, we could actually standardise our variables beforehand and then calculate the covariates.

And then we should get our correlation coefficient. Or we could just use a correlation function in R and get that.

And we just want to sometimes check these things to make sure they're being calculated as we expect they should.

Right. So to standardise it always means dividing by the standard deviation of both variables.

If you're doing it for the correlation coefficient to standardise a variable, it's the same thing.

You make the mean of that variable zero.

That's also converting it into z scores right. Hopefully you remember that from stats one.

Um. So this is what it would look like, right? So, ah.

Which is our Pearson correlation coefficient.

We could just take the covariance of x and Y, which are two variables, and divide that by the product of the two standard deviation.

So that's what we saw in the quiz question to start with.

We could expand it of course where we have that whole covariance equation with the standard deviation here multiplied there.

So if we took that 4.25 that we saw in the example before, and we get these standard deviations, which I'll just go back real quick.

You can see those with those values here. We get 0.87.

Do you think this is a strong correlation? Raise your hands.

Maybe. Yeah. Weak correlation.

No one thinks it's weak. Okay? Right. So we know now that the correlation can be from minus one to positive one,

and that minus one or positive one is a perfect negative or positive correlation if it's exactly this value.

But we have 0.87, that's pretty close 2 to 1.

So if you remember when you were guessing the correlation last week,

you saw those scatterplots and you are thinking about how well does it kind of fit a trend or a line.

And the more sort of dispersed they were, the lower your correlation was probably going to be.

And the more close to that line that it was, the stronger it was.

So this is pretty strong. I think what I will do is I will just show you this reworked and real quick,

because I think the other exercises are a bit more, uh, we'll need a bit more time.

So I'm using this R markdown format again, which just as a reminder, if you forgot the code that I use during lecture is available after lecture.

So be sure to check that out. And you can see.

Here. There's, there will be two files.

One is just the R markdown and then one is the HTML.

So the rendered version like you do with your practicals as well.

Or you should at least. So I want to I did this, uh, correlation by hand or showed some examples that were worked out.

But if we do our functions, we can test. Is this actually giving us the same answer.

And we can put in these variables manually ads and packets.

We can apply the covariance function as in packets.

Doesn't matter which order we put them in. You can see that we still get the same 4.25.

We could standardise them. Right. So here I'm just creating a standardised variable by changing the name and putting them into the scale function,

which is the one that hopefully you remember. Standardise this are variables.

And then if I take the covariance of those standardised variables I get the .87.

One one something, something. And if I just.

Uh, did the correlation. We all get the same thing.

Oh, that's a bit further ahead. I think that I wanted. So does.

Does that make sense when we're doing the steps of getting the covariance.

How it's based on these deviations for each variable.

We've standardised that covariance to get our correlation test.

When we have a value like this, that's, uh, pretty clearly a strong value.

Sometimes we can think, oh, these are just correlated, right? But when we have smaller values like 0.01 or 0 point.

One five. You know, we might want to be able to test the hypothesis.

Are these different from zero? Like, is there likely to be a correlation in the population from our sample?

Because remember, even if we get this really strong value we want to.

We did this from a sample we only had. What was it?

Five observations. Right? Probably not a really good sample size, especially for correlation.

So we can do some hypothesis testing. I'll show you that in a second.

But let's recap this. So always between minus one and positive one.

If it's zero then there's no relationship. No evidence of a correlation.

Wrong. Wrong place. Um. And the ah that correlation.

Pearson's correlation coefficient. It is an effect size measure.

So hopefully you remember sort of what a rule of thumb effect size means.

So if you have plus or -0.1 that's a small effect 0.3 medium 0.5 large effect.

What what is it? If I have 0.45 would you say that.

That's large. Yeah.

Anyone think it's a medium? It could be medium.

So hopefully you remember as well from stats one that when you're interpreting effect sizes,

these rule of thumb interpretations, they aren't sort of like some ground truth per se.

It's an approximation, right? So if you get 0.45 you could maybe call it a large effect.

Um, if you think it's close enough to, to that large effect range, um,

you could always be conservative and round down and say it's, oh, it's a bit of a medium sized effect or a strong medium effect.

So that's up to kind of your interpretation. Don't try to oversell it, but uh, you have to use your judgement.

And one other thing before we look at the testing is the r squared.

So in this case we have little r squared.

But it's related to the big r squared uh which we use in our regression modelling that we'll get to next week.

But if you square the value of your correlation.

You'll get the proportion of variance that's shared by the two variables.

So you can see that in the figure here. If you think about some variability uh Venn diagram I guess then we'll see.

Sort of this is the sort of overlapping variability between the two.

This will be important to know for regression modelling when we get to that next week,

because our R-squared tells us how much of the variability in our outcome variable which will be y is explained by our predictor variables like x.

So we'll be wanting to be able to explain something about y using x or x2 x3, but that will come back next week.

There's a lot of ways to do correlation testing. And or we could just use this correlation function like we just did.

One advantage here is that we can specify these non-parametric versions, which I will cover in a bit today.

And you could also throw in a bunch of variables, not just two, and get a whole correlation matrix.

If you really have a hypothesis about correlation, you know probably will want to try the correlation test,

which will then allow us to get our p values in our confidence interval.

So we can say, is that correlation different than zero or not?

Have. How many of you have, uh, generated a correlation matrix before anyone?

No. Okay. So. We're covering correlation right now, and we're talking about it in a hypothesis testing framework.

And that can be useful. But when you get to your thesis, for example, you probably aren't going to only do a correlation, right.

It's a relatively simple analysis. And while it is a type of inferential statistics, sometimes it actually becomes a bit more of a descriptive metric.

Like you might have a large data set,

and you need to check your correlation properties to be able to set up some more complex models that you want to test.

So we'll come back to that when we get to regression more and we talk about problems if you have too many correlated variables in the model.

But for now we'll keep it at let's just test is there evidence of a correlation or not.

So we can use this quarter test function. And the null hypothesis is that the correlation in the population is zero.

Right. So then we're going to compare that correlation value that we get to zero.

And we're going to use the t distribution. We could also specify the direction right.

So we could use the alternative argument in this function and say less or greater.

If we think it's a positive correlation we would say greater.

And if it's negative we would say less. And then we will get our p value and confidence intervals and we can interpret them.

So I would like you to give this a try. Although since I skipped the last.

Um, give me a one second. I will just adapt this real quick.

Okay. Phew. One extra step.

So you need to create the variable yourself first these two variables and then try out the correlation test function on them.

But I would like you to actually see what happens when you don't specify a direction.

And when you do specify so negative to positive, usually you wouldn't test all of these.

But I want us to look at that in this kind of small sample.

So I'll give you a few minutes to get started on this before I check in with you.

And then we'll go through it together. And of course, if you have a prediction already, we already saw what the value was,

so you could say which one you think is likely to be the case before you run it.

Let's just. Oh.

You can choose. Create a district.

Yep. One.

This. Did you?

Get some things. So we can say something.

So we. 75.

Percent of people that. It's a.

Just. So when I was trying.

Any of these? Things.

Receive calls to you.

Thank you very much.

So I was reading. Yeah, but.

Education. Is what it is.

What it is.

Because it's. Less than zero.

And there we go. It's very funny. So.

Just 40% of the time, it's.

Just because he or she is close to the.

It's said that it's clear. That students as.

Well. As business.

Intelligence. Agencies.

As. As.

That's what they. Say.

So where are you?

And if you should go? That's what I was just trying to say.

The only thing that. Or things like.

That. But I.

Feel like. I just don't.

Like it. Here's what you.

Need to. Let me know what you.

Think. Of this.

It's not. Yeah.

Okay. Okay.

Let's go. Well, yes.

That's. But let's take a look over there so we can, uh, cover a lot more interesting things.

So I saw for some of you, this was pretty easy.

Some of you still trying to remember how to use AR.

Uh, and, of course, maybe, um, you know, I was showing you just kind of the rendered version,

but then you miss out a bit of the dynamics of doing it on your own.

So, you know, if we want to just run a couple lines of code, I use control and enter on windows to just run those.

Or you can highlight them and click run up here. Right. So just a reminder.

But you you would want to make sure you know your variables get put over here into your working environment so that R knows they're there.

And you can then do things like calculate the covariance on them.

I'm doing Ctrl enter again here. Covariance there.

Right. Um, I'll swap back here to, uh, my HTML version, though.

So we saw some interesting things. I got to see some of you who were able to run this.

No problem. So first one I don't specify any arguments.

And then by default I'm getting a two sided test. We notice right away that we get that same 0.87 value.

We're getting quite a high T value. So you would think if we had that kind of 1.96 cut off in mind, that usually is the case for many t distributions.

That would be significant. But it is slightly above our 0.05 threshold.

Right. So with this one we would also see that zero is included in our confidence interval.

Right. So that gives us some kind of conflicting information that uh well I thought the correlation was strong.

My T value is pretty high, but my p value is above the Cut-Off and my confidence interval includes zero.

So actually, if I just had this information, I would be a bit okay,

I don't know actually how to make sense of that because the information is a bit conflicting with what I would expect.

This is partially due to the fact that this is such a small sample,

and the degrees of freedom here are really small, so it changes that shape of the the T distribution.

Usually we will have a much larger degrees of freedom. And then these cut-offs that we usually use of 1.96 usually hold up.

But this is I wanted to give you this example so you could see what happens when you.

Specify a directional hypothesis, right? So if I say less, then look what happens to my p value here.

So before it was 0.054 and now I'm getting 0.97.

Does any can anyone tell me how come it got so large.

Yeah, I love this morning as well. So it's.

And that's why. The interpretation is correct, but I'm looking for something just a little bit more about how do we get that p value.

Do you know? Well, remember, our p value, right is really just the area under the curve relative to our test statistic.

Right? So if I don't have a, uh r t distribution, but imagine it's right here.

Right. And our t value is like over here.

Actually let me just I'll just swap back real quick.

Uh. If I still have the slides.

Wow. Okay.

My zoom is failing here. Sorry about that.

Yes. Right? So let's just let's pretend this is the T distribution and we got that value of three.

If we specify that less then we're getting this entire area under the curve right.

So from that value of three all of this. That's why our p value is almost one.

Because we have almost the entire curve.

When we had it as two sided we were getting like the the little tail here and the little tail here above the value of three.

So that's where we got the 0.054. And what happened when we specified that it was greater?

We see it 0.02. So this is sort of the value that you get.

And being more specific about what your predictions are, right?

If you if you really don't have any idea from the literature what the relationship is between your variables,

then you have to default to two sided and you will have a slightly larger p value.

If you have a directional prediction that is correct, then you will be.

Getting a smaller p value. But again, in this case two, we see it no longer includes zero in the confidence interval.

Um. But this is a really small sample, but it's just meant to show you, again,

some intuition about where this p value is coming from and how that relates to which directionality.

We specify our hypothesis. Does that make sense?

So good to know when you can, what direction you think the relationship is.

Um, sometimes you don't, so you just do two sided. Um, yeah.

Oh. Skipped ahead a bit. Uh, so.

This is just one example, different data set that you will maybe look at later today if we have time.

Um, there's a lot of ways to report correlations. In this case this is a data set looking at exam performance.

And this is an example of a correlation matrix. So there's three variables here exam performance anxiety level and revise or like time spent studying.

And uh and we see. Something about the matrix is it's symmetric often.

So something correlated with itself should be one.

Right. And then we see and -0.4 for positive four and -0.7.

So if we had this and these are the p values.

This is an example of using a different one of those different correlation functions.

These are getting rounded to zero although they are really small.

But we could say exam performance was significantly correlated with exam anxiety with our Pearson R is equal to 0.44.

That's uh, this one. Sorry.

-0.44. That's here. And time spent revising 0.4.

And the time spent revising was also correlated with exam anxiety.

-0.71 Ops were less than 0.001.

So that's one way we could do it. It's much better, of course, if we added in our exact p values.

In this case, there may be too small that we would put like 0.000001, and in which case we would take up a lot of space for zeros in our write up.

We don't need to do that. We could also add confidence intervals for these correlations.

So then we have some idea on the the variability of those.

And we can interpret them as well. Okay, it's break time before we get to non-parametric correlation and then partial correlation.

Uh, how are we feeling today for a full 15 minutes break?

Only a few of you. Ten minutes. Everyone likes ten minutes.

Is it just because we end early or ten minutes is just the right amount?

Okay, let's go with ten minutes. Again, sorry to those of you on the 15 minutes side, I will get you a 15 one of these base, I promise.

Yes. That's. Nice.

So do. I look if I go.

Against this. Yeah.

Looks like. I didn't think that you would have a.

Nice. Little.

Wine with your. Yeah, yeah. Why did.

You do that? I'd like to see you.

Again? We'd have to let.

You have a place. Oh, okay.

Okay. I heard some issues. Yeah.

What's the deal? They.

I. I no.

I mean, it's grace and then it's up to you, but.

But instead of. With what?

That's right. Right.

So I was like.

And actually, I was gonna say that.

The. Years. I was telling everybody and then I.

Was. Like.

Oh, this. Is so sad.

I was just saying. You know, it's.

My. Last.

Year. And it's just you and others.

It's just. It was something else.

But the play was based on that because. I'm quite into it.

I do. Don't like these things here.

Yeah. Yeah.

Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.

Yeah. Yeah.

Well, yeah, I think so.

Yeah. Let's say, let's say for like.

Oh I think, you know you know.

So I don't know.

It makes total sense. But it's not out of danger.

I was very doubtful. Yeah.

How about you? This is so cool.

So nice. So.

What's up? Yeah. You know, I figured, I figured.

Thank you so much for joining.

Us. Oh, you.

So. Most of us are.

I don't. Feel like it's very difficult to feel like you don't have.

To basis. For each other.

There is no. I was very.

So. I'm.

Gonna have some. Yeah, I.

Like. This.

Yeah. Yeah. Well, I suppose.

So, you know. I think it's always good to be nice.

I mean, yeah. Yeah.

This is, I say.

I see you all here. Thank you.

First of all, it's. No.

Yeah. They say.

Things. You know, I think so.

Yeah, I think so. Yeah.

Okay. I, I think to.

How is that possible? Yes.

Yes. All right. That's our ten minute break that majority requested.

I will favour the minority. One day, I promise. So.

So far, we looked at Pearson correlation. Right.

And there are some assumptions of Pearson correlation, like the ones that I've listed here that it's maybe normally distributed.

Or interval or ratio? Scale. How could I check if my variables are normally distributed?

Any ideas? I know.

Yeah. So we can make a histogram and we could see how they are shaped.

Does it look like our normal distribution or not. Interval a ratio scale.

That would be actually just looking at the values themselves right.

So we could we could use R if we're doing our stats.

And we can plug in variables that are not normally distributed or not interval of ratio scale.

And R isn't necessarily going to give us in the functions that we use a warning that says warning your data is not normally distributed.

Right. So we have to make sure we check these things before we run our analysis.

But when we have cases where we don't meet these assumptions, we can actually have alternatives.

So in stats one you learn some nonparametric test that you could use.

For example, if your data didn't meet the assumptions for T-test or Anova.

In this case we have Spearman's rho and Kendall's tau that are non-parametric correlations that you can use for the course.

I don't expect you to know all about how they're calculated.

You can click on the links in the slides to look more at those if you like.

It's more about when they are appropriate, for example, when you don't meet the assumptions of the data.

So in this case, you could see that rho for Spearman's rho it's based on ranked data.

So you could see it's actually based on comparing how two variables might be in their ranking.

So whether it's first or second or third or fourth.

And this is good particularly for cases where you have outliers, which maybe when you saw, uh, the guess the correlation game last week,

you might have seen some cases where there was some value off on its own that maybe skewed your interpretation of what the correlation might be.

So if you have outliers or ordinal data, if the data are already in a ranking kind of format, this is a good one.

And if you have a really small sample.

So maybe like we only had five in our sample in the analysis we just did, maybe this would be more appropriate for that one.

We're not going into the equation for this one, but it's based on like concordant and discordant pairs.

So rather than comparing the ranks, it's about seeing the sort of pattern of the concordance of them.

But again, the main thing you should remember here is that it's should perform well for small samples.

So what do I do if I ran my my Pearson correlation and I am excited, I see there's a strong correlation.

It was what I predicted. But then I make some histograms of my data and I say, well, they're really skewed or really, uh, slightly cathartic.

You know, if you remember that one. Uh, and then I think, okay, what what can I do?

Right. Well, then I could try one of these analyses, or maybe I would have checked what they look like before I ran the correlation.

That's even better. And I will see what interpretation I get of those.

I want you to try that. Uh, now. So there's a data set on canvas.

Uh, I'll just show you so everyone sees it together.

If. Well, I will try to show you.

Or did we lose? Uh oh. Okay, I think we're back.

All right. Sorry about that. Under modules module four, there's two data sets Biggest Liar Dudette and exam dot anxiety dot CSV.

We'll work with those. We have two more exercises today. So already you should see if you looked at the short description here.

These are. This is based on a British TV show I think a competition.

I'm not totally up to speed on a lot of British culture, but the idea here is that there is a competition.

You have ranks where the competition in terms of whether they were first, second, third and how creative they were.

Um, so a maximum score of 60. I want you to try to make a prediction about the relationship between position in the competition,

in the creativity level and test it using these non-parametric correlation.

So in the core test, you can look at the arguments if you need to be reminded how to do that.

But you can specify which method to you. So you could have done Pearson, but I'd like you to try out these two and see what you observe.

I'll give you a bit to get started. If you're struggling, you can always wave me over to nudge you in the right direction.

Otherwise I'll come around shortly. The data format might also be a bit tricky because we you haven't worked with that in a while.

I'm pretty sure you have some for stats one, but um, if you need help with that, let me know.

Local farmers. I.

The. Once.

Sometimes. Doesn't really.

This. Yeah.

So here we. As you say.

Know. But can you?

This. Is it going to?

Yeah. I.

Know, but. You just looking to do.

If you have. And just because.

Yeah. So that is in the Bible.

Yeah. And it doesn't say. You know.

Like that you. You know.

The. What?

Just. To.

Yeah. That's my thinking.

Like. Since he was.

Something. You know, it's.

We have. But I said.

Apart from. All right.

It looks like many of you were able to make some progress.

Not everyone that I went by was able to finish it,

but I want to make sure we have some time to look at this together and still cover partial correlations.

Um, I gave you a data format you don't often see.

Usually you will get a CSV or something, but every now and then I come across some file in the dot that some other data format in this case read.

That table worked for me. Um, you could also use the import data function in the interface.

And ah, maybe someone else found a different solution that worked.

Um.

So here we have to refer to our data frame rate and enter our variables to do the correlation test between position in the competition and creativity.

And I'm specifying here the method Spearman and the alternative less.

So the idea here was I was thinking that it was a negative correlation.

Right? Like the lower your rank in the competition, which lower in this case is actually better, right?

If you're number one, it's a lower value than if you're 30 or something.

Um, will be negatively correlated with creativity.

That was my reasoning at least. Um, and we see the Spearman's rank or Kendall output here.

I'll put them both on the screen. So, especially if I was running these two tests because I saw these data were ordinal.

Right? There are rank. Uh, I would be trying to make sure that I'm getting convergent information, that I would make the same interpretation.

Right. Um, so I do see that the correlation values are not identical.

And that's partially because there are different metrics like the rho versus the tau, but they are about -0.3 or 0.37.

So they're both in the same direction which is comforting.

And our p values are both small smaller than 0.01.

So in this case, you know, both of them would say that there's we could reject the null hypothesis.

Uh, the true kind of correlation is likely less than zero.

You don't have to worry too much about the test statistics for these.

Again, it's more about for these non-parametric ones.

When are they useful to to check relative to using the normal Pearson correlation?

So hopefully you can see, um. Just with the general correlation test, how we can use different types of data,

specify which method we're doing, which alternative hypothesis we want to test.

If we don't specify any of these by default, we're going to get a Pearson.

That's two sided, right? Any questions?

Yeah. What did you. So that it would get rid of the warning of, uh, that, uh, that was coming up for a p value calculation.

Didn't you get that one? Or maybe it was so. Yeah, yeah.

Um, so I think I saw that, and then I checked the arguments and then, uh, then it just it shows up nicer on the, uh, HTML.

Any other questions?

So for correlation testing, this is kind of a general function that I would often use if I was doing that hypothesis test right of.

Is this correlation different than zero? So for the last, uh.

Well, we have 25 minutes or so. Um.

I want to remind you that, you know, correlation is not a causal interpretation.

Even if we do a partial correlation, which we'll talk about next.

This is one example from the uh, uh.

Excuse me. What did you say? Um, you know what?

You already covered this in that course. Yes. Thank you.

Um, you can check out the link for lots of spurious correlations.

There are some funny ones in there. This is just showing an example of ice cream sales and shark attacks.

You might look at them and think, oh, these are very related and they may be correlated.

But you know, eating ice cream isn't going to cause you to be more likely to be attacked by a shark.

There could be other factors going on, like the time of year and other activities you do.

So part of this is related to the third variable problem.

Like there are other things that might be contributing to that relationship.

We're not going to go too much into causality in today.

But of course there's other things like temporal precedence. That's one of the conditions for causality.

Um, so causal language is something that you have to be really careful with in scientific writing.

Um, if you say something causes this or this leads to this, um, you know,

a lot of scientists kind of react to, to that, that you don't have a causal relationship.

You have a correlational relationship or regression. Maybe it's predictive, but it still isn't these right conditions for causality.

So just be careful with that. Uh, as you go forward.

So now we have a bit of a messy slide here, but I want to introduce you to the idea of partial and semi partial correlations.

This connect to regression modelling. When we do multiple variables as a predictor of an outcome.

Maybe just focus on this side first.

So thinking about if we wanted to understand a variable in this case how well are you going to perform on the exam.

You know that might be correlated with how much exam anxiety you have.

Do any of you get a bit stressed when it's time to take a test?

Some of you. Yeah.

And then maybe, you know, on a normal time at home you're doing your you're practising your stats and you're like, this is going great.

And you get at the test and it's like all of that stuff you learn, it's just not accessible to you.

Of course, it could also be correlated with how much time you spend studying.

Um, and we see this overlap here.

Right. That's that squared r squared that we were looking at earlier.

So there should be some overlap in the variability.

If we were within a regression framework we would be able to say like oh,

I could use exam anxiety to account for 19 19.4% of the variability in exam performance.

Or in this case, I could use the metric of how much time you spent studying or revising, uh, to to account for 15.7% of exam performance.

And then there's probably this spot here where they overlap.

Right? So, uh, that both of these account for some of the same portion of variability in exam performance.

And it's cases like these that we might want to, um, have a partial or semi partial correlation.

I would say actually we probably just want to have a regression model where we have the interaction between these two, but we're not there yet.

The idea behind these is that, uh,

we can sort of account for the variability that's overlapping between them and sort of rule it out in our correlation.

So we we essentially just adjust our correlation values based on the information we have about the other association.

So here our partial correlation is about the relationship between two variables

when controlling for the effect that a third variable has on them both.

Whereas this one is about only, uh, only controlling for the third variable on one of the variables.

And you can see that in the equations here, uh, where these are correlation values between variables.

So this is meant to be correlation between y and x1 or y and x2 or between x1 and x2.

And it's adjusted based on this correlation between y and x2 and y.

I'm sorry x1 and x2. The more important thing isn't necessarily exact.

The exact calculation, although it's there if you want to go into the math for it.

The important thing is about looking at how that source of variability is getting

to adjust the estimate of the correlation for the partial or semi partial.

I have this, uh, shown in a different way here.

So partial correlation with this kind of calculation that we have here is going to be giving us sort of what's the correlation between this.

Well accounting for the overlap in the correlations with these.

Or in this case it would we would have one less of these.

And we have to specify this for example when we do it in our.

You can look at more details about these calculations if you want, in the video that I have linked here.

I will save you from having to watch that today though.

There's a couple ways to do partial correlations. Uh, a common one is to use this pipe correlation package.

Using this peak or dot test. So almost like we had before but with the p uh, and then we have to specify now three variables.

It's a bit confusing because the common equations like this are with like a y and then an x1 and x2.

Whereas a lot of the way that we, the materials that we have are about x, y and z.

So we would say x and y are maybe the main variables, and z is the one that you want to control for.

If we look back at this example. Would you say?

Like what would be the two main variables and then the one you want to control for just that idea of like controlling for something?

Make sense? Which?

Which would you say? Or someone want to say? Which to our most important to you?

You think? Any ideas?

Or is that a bit too abstract? Maybe it depends.

Right. What your research focuses. For you.

Maybe you can control how much time you spend studying, but you can't really control how much anxiety you have.

Uh, so then you might say, well, I can I can choose how much to study.

So these could be your, your Ta. And then you want to just control for the influence that anxiety might have on those variables.

That could be one idea.

So controlling in like a statistical sense often means it's not your key variable that you're interested in looking at the relationship for,

but you want to account for it because you know it is important or may be related.

Um, but it's it's kind of up to the researcher to indicate what,

what and why they're kind of controlling or accounting for some third variable in these analyses.

So this is one way we could use this function.

Uh, we could just put in our x, y and z.

And with this peak or as the partial correlation, uh.

You know, we're getting the really the correlation between time spent revising or studying and

exam performance while controlling for the effect that anxiety has on both of these.

The correlation between them and we get this .13 p value pretty large.

Um test statistic here. Sample size Pearson method.

We could look at uh semi partial correlation using the SP core.

So same sort of thing. Although here uh we are specifying just the Z and it's the relationship with the y variable the second variable.

So in this case it does matter which where you enter them because we're leaving out one of those relationships.

So you want to make sure that you enter it the right way.

So, um. So we see here .13.

In this case, 0.09, when we only account for that one relationship.

But they still aren't saying that they're significant partial correlations.

Right. Do you, uh, do you want to give this a test yourself?

Yeah. Okay, so the exam anxiety anxiety file was there on the modules.

Um, there's some variables in there. Exam anxiety and revise.

I'll give you a few minutes to give it a try. You could just specify again using you can more or less depending how you load that data.

Use the code example here. See if you get the same result as me or something different.

Um, so you should have about 5 or 6 minutes to try this out before we have a few things to wrap up on.

What's more valuable? Absolutely.

This. This one is also. It's so nice.

So what are we missing for this conversation? So talk to us.

And so. Something.

So it's. The design of the experiment. It's interesting in the example that.

You know of. So are.

How's it going for you? I see some red over here because it's.

Okay. Just. Yeah, that's always a good start.

For that night. So.

So I would use. Like.

Got. You can also.

And we. She's.

Uh. Well have. Okay.

Sorry. I'm not used to.

I. Know exactly.

I just know that. Well, it's not going to be.

Just what it says. It just says loading.

Loading. Loading.

Loading. Loading. Loading. Loading.

Okay. All right. I know that was a bit of a short amount of time for this exercise.

So if you want to make sure afterwards that you can go through it.

Um, you can also check my solution that I post uh, here that's available after class.

This was a CSV. So you see that I'm loading csvs just by specifying my path, sometimes making sure to refer to this package.

Um, and you can ignore that part for now.

Uh, so here just specifying exactly what I had in the slides.

Right. Looking at this partial correlation, getting that value or the semi partial correlation.

Getting this set of values. In practice you probably won't do the partial and semi partial correlations much because again like I said

we're covering this because it kind of forms the basis for actually how we get to our regression coefficients.

Um, but it's it's good to know that you can do this when you want to account for that third variable.

If you have more variables, then we will need to move to a different kind of framework.

Did any of you already cover the easy stats family of packages in R for in stats one?

Maybe some of you looks kind of familiar.

There's a correlation package in the easy stats, which has some nice functions, for example for just giving you a full correlation matrix.

So also, uh, some nice plotting of the correlation matrix.

So here looking at exam exam anxiety and revision and giving some nice colours to those.

Um, and also one where you can specify partial correlations.

The calculations for this package are different than the ones that we just did.

So you would see maybe you notice already these values are a bit different than the ones that we just estimated,

and that's based on a different calculation. So if you were using some partial correlations in the future,

you want to make sure to specify where you're which functions you're using to estimate them.

But this is sometimes. So if you're using, uh. You're using your correlation matrix method to try to get an idea of what's going on in this data set,

to then set it up for maybe your modelling that you're going to do later.

You might just do something like this rather than going and doing Cauchy test for every single variable in your relationship.

This does give you the correlation, and it does have p values that are indicated here by the asterisks, you know, less than 0.05 or less than 0.001.

I put something like this in the slides too, but you can check it there.

So, um, just to wrap up for correlations, there can be positive or negative.

If you see a 2.5 value for a correlation, you should know something went wrong.

Right. Because it goes only from minus one to positive one.

There can be small, medium, or large. Correlation is never equal to causation.

Nonparametric alternatives to the Pearson correlation exist if your data are not normally distributed or they're non interval or non ratio,

and we can account for a third variable and some ways with partial and semi partial correlations.

Next week we're going to go our Intro to regression.

Chapter 15 of the Navarro text is great to get up to speed on that.

And I hope you will attend your practical sessions this week.

Thank you and see you next time. To.

Fix that. No one else. Me.

And you see? They say that. Yeah. No, I mean yeah.

I it's like. Know.

I don't. Know.

So. Let's get into the partial correlation test.

What do the p values are extremely difficult to test.

So, uh, we saw the one with the semi partial formation and the pass the correlation.

Uh, what does it mean that the p value changes from one to the other?

So I think it's actually kind of like the test of is this or not.

Yeah. Yeah. They were much higher than. Yeah.

Yeah. So that means like right. Maybe if you just do the correlation between the between the two variables.

Yeah. It was less than 1.5. But when you account for that third variable.

Yeah. And then it's no longer than zero.

That won't always be the case. But if you have. But.

I'll turn it around. Yeah. So.

So remember that, like our square.

Yeah. So essentially we're kind of getting smaller here.

Like if we had removed all of that in the beginning of this year.

And then, then if it's a smaller one,

there's a chance that that second so that that's so we can be more confident in a way like, well these are correlated.

But this is also correlated. Yeah. If we account for that then it is just that correlation that you see if you have a sum of.

Yeah, yeah. Thank you.

Bye bye. See you next time. Thanks. No, thanks. Yeah.

Obviously, I want you to.

