[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
No, I don't know. You know, I was a stripper there when we started.

That's all. Yeah. I'm, uh. I'm going back.

Yeah. Yeah. And so she also the might not even when we look at it.

Okay. Thank you all for coming today. Yeah. That's the people who made it.

Chocolate cake. Oh, yeah, I know.

You stay over there. Thank you. Thank. God, we made it.

Yeah. I got the crew.

Yeah. I'll take it. Yeah. You know, friend and patients here at sports medicine is helping patients.

Yeah. Yeah, I know, I know. We'll be all right in this place.

Something I didn't like. Yeah. Yeah. Cancel.

Hello. Um, alright. If you decide to make it sort.

I'm not so sure. That's right.

I don't. Know what else to do.

Yeah, well, the. Super size, so that'd be nice.

Oh, like you said, that was wrong.

Go go go. Here's.

Yeah, it's messing with the tumour. That's what I. I come.

From Indonesia. You do that.

But. And I think especially.

That's what you to. I'll go.

First. I grew up next to the.

All right. Good afternoon. For those of you who could join.

And I guess maybe if someone is watching this back later, 45 minutes after the recording started.

So this is our last session together for stats two.

I just want to wrap up things today for the course, kind of go over what we've covered and, uh, give time for Q&A.

Of course, related to to the exam.

Um, just a reminder that, you know, both myself and Sasha brought this course to you all, and Barbara as well, helped.

Um, so usually the course evaluations would be available at the last time, and then I would ask you all to please just do it now.

But they're not available till next week. So I'm just going to say please evaluate the course next week and you'll get a reminder on canvas.

Um, but it's really useful to know what you think worked well for you, what you think could be improved.

We're actually going to be meeting, uh, a bit later, uh,

in December to talk about the stats track in the program and whether we should make modifications or things like that.

So please take the time to do this. It's always good to know, uh, if we're doing a good job.

So what I have prepared after this is, uh, a couple of slides with different types of our output.

So I'll put these up and I'll give you some questions to think about.

Um, then we can look through this output, make sure that you understand it.

Um, and then I'll open it up, of course, to a general, uh, Q&A before I have some wrap up points for the course.

So. Let's take a look at this output.

Um. What does it represent?

What? What kind of model do you think this is? Yeah.

Yeah. So maybe you see that here. You see the LM function and the formula.

Right. So hopefully by now whenever you're given whatever kind of outputs or at least if not by today,

by the time you take the exam, you will be able to kind of see what is the formula.

What was this model being tested. Um, and then you would see, okay, this one is a model that's predicting depression rates from class.

For example, often if you're given some output and there's some information about variables that you need to understand,

usually that will be provided for the exam. But but in a case like this where um, maybe it would actually say class is dummy coded.

Right. And then you might have to know that, well, if it's using dummy coding, then there's one of these categories of class that's left out.

So you would know that your intercept, right, is uh is the mean for the class low for example.

So sometimes there's some information that will be omitted and that you'll need to be able to tell from the output,

um, what that is and how you could interpret, uh, the model.

So there's three levels of this categorical variable right class.

You can see that here. And the intercept right.

That's the mean of that category for class low.

And how does this model fit overall? What would you would you say that's a good fitting model or poor fitting model?

Anyone? Yeah, I mean are screwed.

Yeah, it's it's, uh. It could be better.

Right? So we could have R-squared that was 70 or 80 or 90%.

Um, it's not terrible though, right? So, um, if it was much lower, like 0.03 than I would, it would be very clear that it's quite poor,

not accounting for much of the variance in the outcome.

Um, but we do have, you know, statistics here that are showing that this regression model is better fitting than the mean, uh, for this outcome.

So what if we expand this one a little bit, um, where we added in a gender variable and an interaction term?

Do you think this model is better or worse than the one that I just showed you?

Anyone. Any guesses? Yeah.

More than. So if we look at this one so .34 and it went down to 0.25.

So how would you interpret that. A little worse than.

And so interactions. It's pretty high.

It's likely that they are not. They're not significant.

Yeah. Yeah. So that's exactly how I would hope you all would kind of approach this.

Right. If, if you saw okay, well we take the same output, run the same model, but we added a different predictor and allowed for an interaction.

You would be asking this question of did the additional things that I added to the model account for more variability than what I had before?

And as you pointed out, the adjusted r squared went down.

Right. And we have that. That's the one that accounts for having multiple parameters in the model.

So that's why that one went down although this one went slightly up.

But it's not adjusted for that. Yeah. Why you add the mother of the gender.

You mean in the model here? Yeah. Yeah, actually, that's, uh, that's redundant there.

So, um, in this case, it would still give you just this main effect.

Uh, so it's written there only for completeness, so that you would know there is an interaction and there is the main effect.

But if you know the function well, you would know that as you did that you will get both of those anyways.

Yeah. What?

Uh. So we, we see that there are not significant effects for the gender variable or interaction effects from the t values,

from the p values of those we see the adjusted r squared went down.

Is there something you would do to actually compare these models to see if there was, uh, significant change in the R squared?

Or other metrics to compare the fit. Okay.

No. So you could be asked that question on the exam.

Like which of the following. Uh, functions, for example, or bits of code might be the good next step to compare the fit of the between the two models.

So maybe you might say, oh, I want to look at the AIC of these models,

or run the Anova to compare the change in the R-squared between them to see if it's, uh, significant.

And you might be asked, of course, to interpret. Uh. What these main effects mean.

What's the correlation? Any guesses? Anyone think it's, uh, point three or less?

Higher than point three, but not higher than 0.5. Yeah.

Higher than 4.5. Uh, well, I don't ask you on the exam.

Uh uh. Exactly a question like that.

But, uh, you should be able to see from a range of options what might be the most likely correlation.

So thinking again about that line that would go through a scatterplot,

how much variability there might be around that line to estimate what the correlation might be.

Also what are some other reasons you might look at a scatter plot.

Um, you know that could be to look at the correlation which we talked about could also be to look at the regression fit.

If we had the regression fit through the observed data, if it was only with a y variable and an x variable and so on.

Um, okay, so how about. How about this model?

Does anyone know what what this model is testing?

Yeah. Thanks. Yeah.

Where do you see that from? Yeah.

I up here? Yeah. And then we see as well that we now have those random effects as well as fixed effects.

Um, we see that it does say linear mixed model with LMR, which we should remember.

That's the linear mixed effect regression, not the linear model.

So you want to make sure you can differentiate those types of outputs so you uh interpret them correctly.

Um, does can anyone tell me what this random effect is telling us or what what it is specifying in the model?

Tough group today. Is everyone just, uh, lost or you think this is all so super easy with all the parent?

Yeah. Go ahead. Social media management ideas.

A random. Yep. Yeah.

It's creativity. Score a. Yeah. Trying to predict the sales.

Yeah. Yeah, exactly. So when you when you see this, you should first recognise this is within the mixed modelling framework.

You see the outcome is sales. So some sales of whatever we don't know what it is but sales of something uh,

being predicted by a fixed effect of creativity score and controlling for a random intercept for social media manager ID.

And then we have some values here. In this case, we are missing our p values that we would usually get if we had added our LMR test.

Package, but we can still interpret our T values with our sort of rule of thumb.

Alpha cut off right, which is about 1.96 for the t value, in which case both of these are certainly exceeding that value.

Um, so you would have at least some, some preliminary evidence that there is an effect for creativity score and the intercept is non-zero.

But of course I would maybe want to know what is the r squared conditional and marginal for this model.

Um, so I could interpret it a bit further. And we do see, at least for the random effects that, uh, this random, uh,

intercepts is accounting for about half of the variance that's still unexplained.

So maybe there is, uh, some other variables to add or some other random effect that we might want to try to specify,

but I would want to look at the R-squared as well. And maybe the ICC uh, for the model.

And how about if we change this and add this random effect structure?

So now we're getting a random slope right for creativity score within the different social media manager IDs.

Which if we look at this variance, uh, component here, it's much smaller than the other, uh, the residual and the ID.

So it's, it is probably not something we would want to specify because it was our main fixed effect.

Right. But um, you can see at least that it's, uh, how it's sort of changing the output here,

but still we observe the same, approximately the same, uh, interpretation of the fixed effects.

So this is just to kind of prime you on. Make sure that you can take a look at some of the, um,

different types of output that we've covered in the semester and answer different types of questions about them.

Uh, what I would say is how many of you have already looked and looked at the, uh, exam, uh, study guide list?

Maybe just raise your hands if you've looked at it already. Okay.

Not everyone. Um, I still have to finalise the exam.

So what that means is all of the questions are there.

Um, but I still have to decide exactly how many, um, and submit the cover sheets and things like that.

Hopefully I have that done today or tomorrow. Um, you can expect that it will be about 60 questions and you have an hour and a half.

So, um, that's about, uh. A minute and a half or so per question.

Some of them are easier. Uh, yeah.

One second. Some of them are going to be more knowledge based. Questions will take less time.

Some will really require more interpretation. Yeah.

No. No. So as stated in the syllabus, the exam is multiple choice and constructed response.

So there will be fill in the blank. Um but then it's usually at most a phrase or something like that.

Um, not uh. There's nothing on there that says, please write up a results section for the whole output or anything like that.

So, um, and I think it's, it depends a bit on the randomisation, although I try to account for that.

But it should be approximately like 80% multiple choice and then maybe 20%, uh, constructed response, fill in the blank.

Sometimes there could be also be multiple fill in the blanks for like one item.

What other questions do you have about the exam? Are there other topics we can pull up?

Uh, slides from other modules and look at some of those again together, or any of the topics you saw on the study guide.

Any questions that you have? It's open. Uh. Yeah.

I have a question about grading. Mhm. Question done at the same point like both of them are.

Want to be for. Yeah, so I still have to finalise that.

But, uh, typically it should be that all questions are worth one point.

It could be that if it's a multiple fill in the blank option, that those might be 1.2.

Um, what you what you can expect from me as well.

Once the exam is submitted to the administration, I will also post the, the cover sheet, uh,

which has the final official information about the number of questions, how each, uh, how the grading works.

Uh, officially. So that gives you an idea for now. And then when it's official.

Official. Then I'll communicate that to. Yeah. Other questions.

Yeah. Or is that just a stretch? Huh? Okay.

Are there any things that I already showed you that you think I totally forgot that already?

Let's let's go back to the slides quickly and look at it.

No. You guys are, uh, feeling confident then, huh?

Oh, I hope, uh. I hope you will all do, uh.

Well. Of course. Um, everyone is registered to take the exam.

Is that right? Good. Okay. And, uh.

Well, they didn't schedule your exam too early in the morning.

That's always nice. Whenever I see them scheduled at, uh, 8 a.m., I always feel bad for you all.

Uh, although maybe some of you like getting up early, but let's see, uh.

For the exam grading. Um.

It depends a bit. Uh, I haven't. So usually we used to take the exams on canvas, and I migrated to test vision a couple of years ago,

and sometimes it's just more efficient to submit the grades to the administration, and then you will just see them and Osiris.

Um, sometimes I'm able to post them back into canvas so you can see them there.

Um, I will communicate that on canvas as well.

What what what will. Be given to you and where?

Um, if there as it also states in the syllabus, if you request an exam inspection,

there's a period after the exam where you can request that so that you can get an appointment to see it prior to taking the reset.

Everyone knows the reset policy as well, right?

That, uh, I think since you all started, it's been if you take a reset that that is the score that counts.

Yeah. Okay. It wasn't always that case.

So I have to make sure that we're on board with, uh, understanding that it used to be the the highest grade would count, but.

So if you do well and you're happy with the first one, which I hope you are, then don't take the reset.

I guess we don't need the full, full hour today, but that's, uh.

That's all right. So what I would do then is, uh, I have a few slides, just things to wrap up to, to keep in mind.

I'm happy to stick around if you want some one on one or something to to look at some of the specific topics.

Um, if not, then of course we can. Uh, we can just end it here and, uh, I will.

Um, so I want to point you to a couple of things.

Right. So in your stats journey for the last semester and this semester, we've really been working within the generalised Linear modelling framework.

Um, which this resource here, you know, kind of puts all of these like Anova,

your t test, your linear regression, uh, all into this one kind of framework.

And you can use this as a reminder of what the different specification of these look like, how to do them in R, for example.

Um, but I would want you to remember that statistical decision making isn't easy.

So we've in this course looked more at model based approaches.

Whereas last semester you were thinking more about comparing the means between two groups or more than one groups and still looking at interactions.

Um, but with the model based approach. Right. We we looked at how we could sort of think about the different things that we could add to our models to

try to account for the variability in our outcome variable and whether adding and multiple predictors,

adding in interaction terms, specifying random effects,

how to systematically build more complex models to characterise our data and see whether they improve the fit or not.

Right. So we want to ultimately end up with, uh, you know,

a model that is as simple as it needs to be to describe as much variability about our data as it can,

that we think will generally generalise beyond just the sample of data that we've collected to our population.

We're trying to understand. Please don't misuse or misinterpret your p values or follow the null ritual.

Right? So I have tried throughout the course to emphasise the value of looking at your confidence intervals,

your test statistics, uh, understanding the data as well, and different fit metrics of an overall model.

It's too often I still find a lot of scientists that just only put in p values in their paper,

or just overinterpret what that single statistic is telling them.

Uh, and I hope that you are prepared now to not fall into that trap, to realise the larger picture of what your data are telling you.

In this course. We didn't have a lot of time to go into theory.

Right. We're really focussed on here's a data set very rapidly understand a bit of the details about the data before you run an analysis.

But I always said make some prediction about what you expect before you run this model.

And that should really come from, you know, the theory or the prior empirical work,

which we don't have enough time in this course to like give you the background on all of these different data sets.

But, um, hopefully, you know, as you go into your research workshops, I think, which will be next year, also your thesis.

Um. You know, maybe the year after that.

Research workshops next semester for you? Yeah.

Okay. Some of you, maybe, um, you know, you'll you'll learn to sort of like, combine, you know,

theory and prior work with your research questions and the tools that you'll use like you've developed in this course to, to test those.

So these will go hand in hand with your experiments. And, uh, you should always kind of combine this, right.

Like you, you have tools, statistical computational tools.

Uh, those can inform the type of questions you ask. But that should really also be bidirectional, right?

Your your theory and knowledge of the literature informs the way that you ask questions and the tools you use to answer them.

So I'm pretty sure a lot of you, when you get to your A thesis.

You're going to have to think back of what is the way to analyse this data and, uh,

and maybe look at some of these decision aids for this is how many outcome variables I have, how many predictors, how many interactions.

Um, but those resources are there. Uh, make sure to save your stats documents somewhere that you can access, you know,

in a year and hopefully beyond that, uh, because they should come in handy.

I have had, uh, a lot of comments before that people want to go and learn more stats on their own.

Well, you will still go into machine learning, which builds on statistics,

uh, and several ways, and you can go into deep learning and things like that.

But if you want more on statistical modelling, I think this is a really good book that kind of builds up on where we have left off for this course.

So. And this is, uh, this book down online version is free.

So, of course, I like to share things that are openly available with you all.

With that being said, I will, uh,

ended there and I will thank you all for a nice semester and I wish you all good luck with your exams and your projects.

And, uh, maybe I'll see you, uh, for thesis or things like that.

Thanks. You can think of that.

I. Know that.

Maybe you want. To go see.

Some of this. Oh.

Yeah. Yeah, I should actually.

I actually posted this, but I didn't. Actually.

Do the same thing. I was like, I don't still five.

It will be like, you know, somebody told me I saw that multi-agent system six.

Yeah. Oh, yeah.

Thank you. Any other questions? Uh, I think I might have to sneeze, you know.

It's not about. Um.

It's probably going to come back. Yeah, yeah.

No, that's a good point. Yeah. Next week will be number six.

Derek. Uh. Um.

Yeah. What else do we need to study?

Oh, you got this? Yeah. Did you this.

I didn't post it, uh, shortly after, uh. Because we'll do the Q&A for that.

Uh oh. Uh, but it does have a part of. What you should know.

And it does include. Results.

From my thoughts about safe from some of this.

Stuff. So check this out right here.

Uh, yeah. So, you know, either one of them is.

So. Oh, yes.

Yeah, I think it could pick up the whole. Thing all.

Is there anyone that. Find a good balance between.

It's true, but we don't. We have like four different ways of defining what seafood paella is.

So I thought about sharing the data and.

Origin. We also had.

The experience of the. Making your life 45 degrees and then looking at the distance to mass.

And we also thought about. Subtracting them from each other and getting was closest to zero.

We don't know what's best. What's, uh. What's.

The question was to find the best balance.

So when I get a chance to. And it's the balance between.

That are. Because it's come up with the defence.

How much you to spend. Yeah, definitely.

And, uh, sometimes I. Fall into a similar.

Other producers. For example, you could do the whole purpose of what is the right metric.

That's not. Just to point out that.

Yeah, it's, you know. Yeah. It's not always easy to do what's the right way.

Um, I think what you could do is see which which one seems.

Um, that you can kind of motivate. And then you can still say.

There are other ways to operationalise. Such as.

They work for you don't. Yeah, sure.

Yeah. Yeah. So that's typically how. I have to work as well.

If there wasn't, like someone else. This way.

If you're sort of doing in this area or do you have an operational?

Operational. And which you could do.

Of course, it's just maybe a few of us. And look at the distribution.

Otherwise, I think it might be at least one. Question.

Uh, do you mean the distribution of the metric?

The. It does kind of discord.

It just wants to. The best.

Uh. Maybe I misunderstood the question.

So. So you have this part where. Uh.

You talk about different ways to transform. These two into a single dimension.

Yeah. And then what were you going to?

With those. Basically what you want is, uh.

The least amount of trash. Berkeley. So that is cheap.

And also. So that would just be the lowest score.

So the. Like we want to minimise them as much as possible.

But. You want to get as close to this basically.

But it's also open up. So you do get.

You get to see all those? If you was present, this would be something.

Each business has a different. It's.

So. But. This is the one that you.

But she writes, you can choose how much to spend.

Yeah. And the liver as this is something that's up to.

So I could. So you could actually analyse this.

Because you see. Well, the problem with that is increasing costs doesn't necessarily cause the cost of base of 330.

Any combination of all. So.

You wouldn't really get to. It would just be.

It has a lot of curves in it. Yeah. You know, it's because it's a mix of three variables that are.

It's not the best model. It's, um. But this thing is worth more interest to the room.

I think so. I think this is. So how are you approaching?

Can you remind me what things are different? You talk about distance. With that before.

Like the two combinations, I think this. That's like everyone's to capture.

Yeah. I was just thinking, uh, just.

The. Litter the mean amount of litter divided by the cost.

So then you will. You will have one day. Or you could still have a.

Each of the things that are sort of weighted by. Yeah.

Much better. And then what will you do with that?

Which is think. That would be the least amount.

So it's then it gets like these. Get some here. That's for example.

How did you go? I love what you have to say.

Very. Yeah. So you would think.

I think probably you want this one. Because, uh, the cost is very low and there's almost nothing that.

And what what makes this? Well, for example, what makes this one different than that?

That there's so much. Yeah, I think it's good because.

Maybe we could do a linear model.

Of course. Creation. Mostly. Very. You could see which one sort of drives the biggest changes in culture.

But we know that, you know, it's. The.

You know, like we have the points here and they differ from each other, but we don't know if that's true because.

Because they're always. Um.

Oh well, yeah, they all have. And the fact that they were all in.

I was lucky because this is the only thing. I was particularly litter among from all that.

You know what if you put it in. So then if it's like on the same, if it's the same cost and there's a little difference between the two that.

I was conscious that you. And try to make a prediction about which.

Yeah, maybe there's a few sort of simple question. Together and one might like I what I worry that trying to find like a singular value.

Might lead you to two. Simple. Yeah.

That's why. So, uh, so I think it could.

It could be part of an answer that if you could say. From this set of models and analysis yourself.

This seems to. Over the age of 65.

About. But then you might ask. So why is this so bad?

For some cost of. Which of the factors.

Strongest. Uh, and then so then maybe that's also that there's something.

The randomisation of. So we could, for example, maybe.

If you grab, like everything, the lower cost of life and look at the differences.

Yeah. So that's that's an idea since the two.

Yes. You're right. Low versus high. Because I think even within that within this one is like really high and then the other.

Like that with maybe one of our. Do I did, I predicted.

Litter. Litter abounds from. People.

But they were all. But sometimes, uh, like, you don't have to have.

You do sometimes. Look at all.

But. But you know. So even if you even do write up that.

And you have. Inquisitive and like your wife.

This. Bye bye. 16.

The idea. I don't have to do that.

Couple days ago. Um, so what I would recommend is.

Just think about the story of. Are able to tell from your model and, you know, some some specific.

One of these. But really, what can you tell us?

And if you don't know something. But then just think about.

Reflect on. Uh, that way I could kind of bring the.

Is I. Make the model stop early after a few enough steps to.

I'm out later. Is.

Okay. Uh. That's interesting.

So when, when I was talking about it for us to look at, if you might run into more of it than you do to you use kind of like a rolling joke.

Sort of stabilises across. Um.

All you need to do is. So I don't.

No, I mean, just like you, you're making choices about how did you do this thing in the world of modelling where you can do anything you want?

That. But if you have a plot.

Stop. Double check the rubric.

Just, uh, before you send that to and just see the different components of the.

Thank you. Yes. You're welcome. Good luck finishing things up.

Thanks. Going to be rough.

Don't forget the, uh, evaluations too. Yeah.

Yeah. I.

