[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Testing. Hello? Hello? Can you hear me? All right. Yes. Nice to see you all today.

This afternoon. Uh, hopefully you're ready for some stats, too.

I think I'm ready. Uh, we're going to be talking about interactions in our multiple regression model.

So I think just looking at where we're at.

Right. We're here module eight. We have just a few more after this.

Um, we're going to add just one layer of complexity today to what we've already covered last week with multiple regression.

Uh, just to, um, try to understand what happens when we have variables in our model that interact.

So I think it's actually going to be a bit of a shorter lecture today.

Uh, then maybe the last one, because we covered what was multiple regression and what were all of the assumptions that went in there.

Hopefully you remember that from two weeks ago. If not, of course, we can look at some of these things together.

Uh, so you can see sorry, you can ignore this one.

That was a mistake. But we're going to just compare, uh, multiple regression with interactions to what we've covered so far.

How do we go about creating interaction terms and most importantly, how do we understand them?

We're going to keep it simple in terms of maybe just two variables that interact.

Uh, but of course you can scale the complexity. Too many things interacting.

Although the interpretation, as you might see in a bit, gets a bit tricky.

I actually don't have exercises today. They will all be in your practical.

But I do still have our, uh, with clep quizzes, so I'll just display that.

In a second. Yeah.

All right. So go ahead and please, uh, scan and join for three questions I have for you today.

Seems like the trains are also back to normal. So nice that you don't have to take the bus anymore.

If you're coming from out of Tilburg. Looks like almost everyone is in.

Shall we go on to the first one? Yeah. Okay.

Okay, I'll show up, make this output show up. All right, so given the output here, which of the models has a better fit.

So you have output here from two models. Great time to mow the leaves.

All right. About seven more seconds for you. All right.

How did you do? Okay.

So we have some variability in the answers here.

Well, let's look at it together. So we talked two weeks ago when we met about ways that we could compare models and how well they fit.

Hopefully you remember we talked about the I see this Q is a little off, but hopefully you knew that this here was the AIC.

And which metric here would tell you that the AIC is a better fit?

Anyone remember what we'd be looking for? Yeah.

Lower one. Exactly. Yeah. So from here, if you just use I see alone, then you would see this value is lower than this one.

So maybe that's a better fit. So I guess you probably put two.

Yeah. Um what else could we look at. Right. Well we could look at the r squared and we saw the r squareds here.

They're pretty close. Right. So 63.63 or 0.65.

Um so we do see from here that the second model is explaining a bit more of the variance in the outcome.

We have no idea what the outcome is because I didn't give that. But it's about, you know, 3% more or something like that right.

Um, Rmse. So our error is also a bit lower.

Now we have f and p values here for the overall model.

What we miss actually is what we did last time when we did an Anova that compared the two models to tell us,

for example, if that r squared between them was a significant change in the variability.

So if you put model one, I would say model one would be incorrect.

If you put not enough information provided and you thought that that was specific to the R squared,

and you would have liked to have seen that Anova comparison of the two fits, then I would say that that could be a good answer as well.

But mostly I would have gone for model two here.

Does this make sense? This refreshes you a bit on what we're looking at for model fit.

Okay. So the next one I have is a bit more open ended.

I'd like you to think about three variables where y is our outcome variable,

and two variables that you think that would interact to explain the variability, variability and y.

So this you can put some in here and we can actually move them around.

But uh so think of three variables that have some relationship and a possible interaction.

And I'll just give you a bit of time to think about this. And you can of course talk with your neighbour too, with what ideas you have.

So these ones are pretty similar. Exam grade and test results.

Maybe you would use your exam grade for. I'm going to put this one in the Y, but I don't know.

Do you have option to move this back? Yeah.

Okay. I'm thinking an exam performance also is going to be our Y.

So think about our outcome variable right. The thing that we want to explain.

Maybe you wanted to use that to explain something else. So. Coffee.

Coffee? I'm going to move here. Let's see.

So I'm thinking maybe. The. Poverty and inequality were meant to interact, to go with the rate of crime.

Is that what someone was thinking? I could see that as a possible one.

Coffee. This could be hours of studied coffee and then your exam grade.

What do we have here? Diet as well. So. What's diet going with?

Is that supposed to be? Sleep? How much sleep you get?

Maybe. And BMI that could see that one.

So can anyone explain what you were thinking when you put the two here?

What what what did you mean by they might have an interaction?

Yeah. Together they might have a stronger attack on each of the five of them on their own.

So together, they might have a stronger effect than either of them on their own.

That's a good, good start. Anyone else? What does it mean if they might interact?

You want to add to it? Yeah. Maybe another. Another. Is that?

That may be there, but there. Is not.

There is also. That's interesting.

So it could be any one of them is not there. You won't observe the effect.

So it means that there's some kind of dependency between the two variables, right.

That if we're really interested in the stuff that's here in our r y category of outcome variables,

things that we want to be able to explain, and we would take, you know, this variable and this variable,

and we would use both of them to try to explain the variability here, but not just both of them as individual predictors,

but the way that these two might go together and how that dependency might change.

How much of the outcome variable we can explain. So it could be that they have a stronger effect.

Usually it's that the level of one of the variables has a different effect dependent upon the levels of the other.

And we're going to look at how we could visualise this. Uh that's what we're going to do for the whole, uh, lecture today.

For the most part.

So this is just meant to get you thinking about how things could interact with each other, and they might have a different relationship with, um,

the Y and I could actually follow up and say, okay, well, maybe draw what you think these relationships look like, but I won't do that for today.

Um, let's go to one last question here. So this one's fill in the blank.

I'll give you a second to read it and put in some ideas for the two blanks.

20s left. Ten.

Maybe I was too quick on this one. All right.

Some of you got some answers, and let's take a look. So.

Uh, let's see most of you for one.

Well, few of you said L-I'm different spellings, so we're trying to estimate the best fitting line that has the least squares.

This would. Maybe apply to the model, but the model is more general, right?

So we could have things that are not quite align. Um, polynomials.

We haven't gotten there yet. And this is for simple linear regression, not polynomial regression.

So I would go with line for this number one and number two.

If you put plain that would be the right answer there.

So a couple of you had plain as well. So we are fitting a model.

Right. And the model does have um. Some of these squared error that we're trying to minimise.

But the particular shape of the model was what the blanks were, uh, trying to get at here.

Does that make sense? Okay.

Any questions on this? Before we go back to slides.

I think that was the last one. I have one more question for you, though.

Maybe you already did the reading, so you already know. But so far we've had additive effects in our regression, right?

So if we were going to look at the relationship here between let's do, uh, time working and studying and exam performance, we could add these.

So working plus study time equals exam performance.

What would we do if we wanted to have an interaction? Besides addition.

Yeah. The blood multiplier. Yeah. So let's take a look at that.

So here's where we were before you had a break for exams or time off.

Or catching up on all the other things we need to do, right? So here's our simple linear regression model.

All we've been doing is expanding on this for the last period.

So we had this intercept plus our regression coefficient times our predictor variable plus some error equals our outcome variable y.

We expanded that to have, you know, more than one predictor that we added together up to however many.

And. As you just said, we could add the interaction, which is the multiplication of variables together.

So we could have here we have x and z and we can estimate a third regression coefficient.

That's the interaction term of the two variables.

So this is how we can define an interaction when the effect of one predictor differs based on the level or magnitude of another predictor variable.

Right. So there's this dependence between them and the effect that you observe, uh, will change based on what the level is of one of the variables.

That can be a bit tricky to interpret. So that's why I've put this, uh, interpretation here.

So with The Intercept, uh, that's going to be the predicted outcome when both of those predictors are equal to zero.

Right. That's just that hasn't changed from last time. The new one here, though, is our interaction of x and Z.

Predicted is the change in the slope of x for one unit change in Z or vice versa?

So these ones are also the same as what we had last time as well.

But this change, this interaction term, is what we want to try to understand a bit better.

But let's take a look at some figures that show some interaction examples.

These were for from one of the readings, I believe, and it was looking at, say, how sex or gender relates to drug dose responses or in this case, age.

And what we often see when we're looking in at an interaction if we make some plots,

maybe you remember this as well from interactions in Anova that you see lines that maybe intersect, right.

Different patterns of the line. So this drug dose seems to depend on this categorical variable.

For example there's the slope is less strong in this case than in this case.

Hopefully you see that and here as well.

So this has a the young population here has a lower slope compared to middle or old which has a steeper slope.

So this is a categorical interaction right, where we have a categorical variable.

And that the effect of drug dose on cholesterol I guess uh depends on which of the levels of the categorical variable.

Uh, one of the observations is. I think that the categorical cases, this is basically what you did in Anova and stats one,

but it's a bit trickier when we have continuous predictors that interact.

So what kind of things can we answer with interaction? So often we think the world is, you know, more complex than our simple regression model,

probably more complex than just the interactions we would test today.

But we often think that things interact and that gives rise to some complexity.

So we want to have research questions that map to the complexity of how we see these phenomena in the real world, right.

So these are generic kinds of questions like what's the predicted y or outcome given a particular x and z.

What's the relationship of x on y at particular values of z.

And this will be called something like simple slopes or simple effects.

We'll define these soon. And is there a difference in the relationship of x on y for different values of z.

That would be comparing the simple slopes.

So, you know, when you're thinking about whatever research questions you might be wanting to answer and test,

you could, you know, use these as a template for for them.

There's a couple ways we could create interaction terms so we could.

Actually just create a new variable and we could just take the product of the two.

Um. I don't know when there's a lot of cases that you want to do this.

Maybe if you need some transformation of them, uh, we can actually just include, uh, the variables themselves like this in our regression model.

So we could, for example, just do our linear model with our outcome equal to variable one times variable two.

And this will actually give us what we had before which would be this part.

Plus the interaction so our knows for us to give all lower order main effects in addition to the interaction effects.

But you can write it out. So you could also do variable one plus variable two plus the interaction.

So this would be another way that you could write it with a colon instead of the asterisks.

Uh so this function can take both of these, uh types of input.

I skipped over this bullet. But in maybe if you do include like a new variable that can be useful for looking at multicollinearity collinearity.

Um, if you're trying to see how correlated is this interaction term with my, uh, with your other variables that are already in there.

So if you're just taking the product of two terms, you would expect it to be correlated, right?

Um, so there's some things you can do.

Uh, if you find that your interaction term was two correlated, uh, then you may have that multicollinearity issue that we talked about two weeks ago.

You could use centring. So we already talked about centring as well.

Uh, to reduce the collinearity uh, from the interaction terms by doing something like this.

Um, but I think there's actually some good literature that suggest you don't really need to worry about that.

Um, so most cases, I would think that you.

Uh, you can just include the interaction term and check your model assumptions, right.

And make sure that you're not getting any multicollinearity problems.

Although if you do, you can try centring again as a solution.

And if you need to, uh, have some references to support that, you don't need to bother with centring.

These are some good ideas. This makes sense so far.

So interaction term we just put it in. Um what can we do to further understand our interactions.

Well there's a few options. So maybe I'll just start at the bottom.

Plotting I think is always useful. Right. You understand the patterns of your data, the patterns from your model.

You can understand, uh, in particular what this interaction might be telling us.

We can probe them. So we could use specific follow on hypothesis test, uh, to look at simple slopes or differences in simple slopes.

And I have simple slopes on the next slide for us. But we can also decompose it so we can break down this interaction into its lower order components.

So what does this mean? I don't have a good example of this actually.

Let me just double check. No.

Uh. So let's imagine that we had our regression model output from our up here, which I don't have.

Um. What did we have in there? Right.

So before we had the effect of our predictors on our outcome, we would see what the regression coefficient was, the t value for that, the p value.

And we'll have the same thing for our interaction term.

Right. So we would see there either is or is not a significant interaction.

But this is what we would need to do to then qualify.

What does that significant interaction even mean. Right.

So before we were thinking, is the model a good fit of our data?

Are our predictors significant predictors of our outcomes.

And here if we see we observe a significant interaction.

These are the things that we would want to do to say well what does that interaction even mean.

So let's take a look now at the simple slopes part.

There's a lot on this slide. Um, so let's just start with the top.

All right. So we have our interaction term here again this third regression coefficient.

So if we find that significant interaction we could make some plots right.

So we could have a plot like this that shows us here is the relationship between x and y.

Depending on which level the variable z is at.

So you would see, for example, when Z is at 10.070, it looks like the effect is not that strong.

It's a pretty flat line. Whereas we have like a positive slope when Z is at 12 or a negative slope when z is at 7.93.

So this may look arbitrary right now because I haven't told you how we get to those values,

which I will get to soon, but you can see very easily, right?

If I asked you what is the relationship of X and y? Well, accounting for the level of Z, you would tell me something like I just mentioned, right.

This makes it very clear, not always that easy to see such a difference.

Um, but so what we want to do is we want to decompose our regression equations into simple slopes and intercepts to try to understand,

especially the, uh, continuous variables and how, uh, we could make a plot like this, for example.

So this shows like an example, a worked example of an estimate from a model where this would be our intercept.

Right. This is our regression coefficient for x for z and for the interaction term.

And we can pull out these values to get the simple slope or the simple intercept.

Like that, and we can, uh, convert them. So a simple intercept would be at a given level of Z.

Where is that intercept? So here or here or here. And the simple slope is at a given level of z in this case for x.

What is that slope. Right. So that's how we could then solve these from our output to define them.

Although of course we can use R to generate these for us. But it's good to know what kind of goes into unpacking this.

Does it make sense why we would want to get some simple slopes and intercepts to understand the interaction?

Otherwise we would just present a plot, the predicted values from the model.

Right? And we wouldn't really have the specific visualisation of the interaction between them.

So for the simple slopes that where those values of z came from is using one of the common approaches,

which would be to take plus or minus one standard deviation from the mean for that continuous predictor z.

So I'll go back real quick. So we could see here that this 10.7 would be the mean.

This would be plus one standard deviation above the mean. This green line and the red one would be minus one standard deviation.

So then we know that this relationship between x and y that depends on the

level of z is either at the mean or above or below by one standard deviation.

This choice is really a convention. It's kind of arbitrary.

Um, but it can be meaningful, right? If, you know, you know a lot about the distribution of your variables based on the standard deviation.

So you could interpret them and then you could plug these back in.

So this isn't like that. Interesting.

Maybe to look at just these equations.

But it's good to know how you could take these values and plug them back into the equations that we had here so that we could solve for these simple,

uh, regression lines, a simple slope. So the intercept, uh, for example, or the slope.

You could choose other ones. So again I said it's semi arbitrary.

Uh, you may have something that's more meaningful depending on your data set.

Uh, or you could even use quantiles too. So you could say, you know, the upper quantile or lowest quantile.

Um, yeah, this is actually just putting it all together on one slide.

So having a visualisation in your paper, uh, you know,

you would then put something like this to then unpack that interaction effect and you would explain, you know, what happens with these simple slope.

So you know where the meaningful, uh, pattern is. Here is the next thing that we could do for plotting.

So I just showed you the plot, but I didn't say, how do we get there?

Um, there's a nice package called rock chalk. I don't know where they got that from.

Maybe someone was a climber. And, uh, stats are package lover when they develop this.

Um, but then you can do plot slopes and you could fit.

You put your model object in here, and then you can specify which variables should be your x, which one moderates x.

So that's the one that you want to be on multiple lines like this.

Uh and then how you're going to do that um, sort of splitting that, moderating of x uh variable.

So in this case that's using the standard deviation like I showed you before.

Um, and this will then give us, uh, an interactive plot that will look something like this.

So this example here is between GPA and work ethic based, um, IQ centred, I guess.

Also don't think, uh, I don't know the source of this, uh, data, but I would like you to take a minute and think about what you see on the plot here.

Maybe talk with your neighbour. Uh, how would you interpret this interaction effect between these variables?

Uh, I'll give you a minute before I'd like to hear some ideas.

You. So.

It's. So.

Yeah. Thank you. So. You.

That's what I don't. I think that's. So that's.

So this one. This one. And then.

You don't know to. Yes, I.

Yes. But you.

So to like. I said like.

A nice lotion and. Is not.

I don't know. It was.

Us. I.

You know that, Squire? Does everyone have a good idea how to interpret this?

There's a no, I see. Well, let's look at it together then.

Some of you, I think, had quite some good intuitions.

I will just clarify. I think this is simulated data.

So don't think that you can interpret this as some kind of scientific evidence for this relationship.

But if you saw this from your data, what could you conclude from it?

Right. So we have work ethic, which is, you know, how hard you might work at something as a variable GPA.

Of course, that's your grade point average and IQ here.

And we have this in three, uh, in three segments.

Right. So the IQ that's the average of whatever this sample, this one standard deviation above the average and one standard deviation below.

Notice that these are centred too, right? So this value here would be when work ethic.

That's the average work ethic of the sample. So these two are also above or below the average work ethic.

But GPA is going here from one point something to.

3.5 or 4. So if we start with the average, we see something like we expect maybe the harder you work or the,

uh, then then your GPA will generally be higher at the average IQ.

Uh, if you're have an above average IQ, then this plot shows that you would have a quicker rate of, uh, increasing your GPA based on your work ethic.

And if you had a lower than average, it shows there's not really an effect.

Right? So you would kind of predict the same GPA no matter what the work ethic was.

So this would be a bit. Sad to observe that you couldn't work harder to get better grades, for example.

Hopefully this gives you an idea of how two variables that are predictor.

So in this case work ethic and IQ could interact where the relationship between them and the outcome depend on the levels of the other.

Right. In this case, these are both positive, but one is more strongly related.

And then this one seems to have a flat slope. That makes sense.

Now for those of you who weren't sure how to interpret it.

No, we can talk. Actually, we're going to be finished.

Uh. Pretty soon. Today I have maybe just another few slides.

Let me check that real quick. Yeah, just another couple of slides.

So I'm happy to, uh, hang around and talk stats stuff.

If any of you want to or look through some other examples together.

Um. Talk about projects or things like that, so let me know.

I'll finish up with a couple slides and then, uh, we can wrap up.

So. Again, we have maybe observed a significant interaction in our model.

If we don't observe a significant interaction, we don't need to do any of this stuff that I've just showed you, right?

We would just say there was no evidence of an interaction effect from this sample,

and then we don't need to explore what that interaction would be because there wasn't an interaction.

But if we do see a significant interaction, then we want to see, okay, what what is that relationship we're observing?

Now. So far, we've looked at kind of getting these little equations for simple intercepts and slope, so we could maybe make plots of them.

So that was two of the points that we had back here.

Um. But we could actually also compare them, right?

So in this case, actually I'll go back once more.

Sorry. In this case we see, for example, that these slopes, they do look quite different, especially different from this one.

But are all of these slopes different or not? That's something we can also do a follow on statistical test to analyse.

Maybe in this case it looks really clear that they're different. But let's go back real quick to this one we had earlier.

Of course. These are categories. Um, but.

You know, especially these who might say, okay, well, the pattern is slightly different, but are those slopes actually different from each other?

That's kind of the question that we would want to follow up with next.

So is there a difference in these simple slopes that help us understand the interaction?

So I think one way to do this is using the m m means package.

This is the estimated marginal means package. And this can help us to decompose into simple slopes and then actually make some comparisons of those.

So this package requires uh, manually defining those sort of representative values of our z variable.

Again our this this variable is a bit a bit arbitrary too.

Um, so when you look at this case, we could have done work ethic as the one that we split into lines.

But I think intuitively it's a bit easier to interpret if we're splitting this one,

using this one as our z variable to split and to average above or below average IQ compared to work ethic,

because maybe not everyone has an as intuitive and understanding of the average work ethic, at least I don't.

I'm not sure. So here you have to just, uh, see which way makes most sense to interpret the interaction,

which one you're going to use to split into these different, uh, values.

So this is just a manual example of creating, uh, this effort variable above, which is a here.

That's just my convention I used. So that's the mean plus the standard deviation of effort.

At the mean and then below. So B I put the four below and then that's minus standard deviation.

And if we look at those values and round them just so they look a bit nicer that that was the step done here.

So the average here is 29.71.

Standard deviation below 24.5 and 34.8 is above.

So just doing that to look at them you wouldn't need to do that for your analyses per se.

We can then use this variable here. The estimated marginal means.

Trends. For example, and get these different variables.

These are three separable, separate simple slopes for our x variable.

This is ours. And effort. Is this what this example is working through?

So this would be solving for our simple slopes that we did by hand before.

That we could use this function to get those for us without us having to do the the work per se.

But that still doesn't allow us yet to make that comparison between them.

We just have these, uh, trend estimates. Right.

So you could see, for example, this is, uh, smaller coefficient than this one, which is even bigger than this one.

And we have some confidence interval around those. But if we want to do our comparison that would look something like this.

So. We could, for example, make a plot with this example.

I'll come back to that. But this main testing of these pairwise differences, we can use that same function from before and trends which I used here.

And put in pairwise based on which variable you want to compare in a pairwise way.

And then we get this contrast variable. Or output.

And then what this is telling us actually, is whether those slopes for those different comparisons are actually different.

Right. So we see this value here 24.5 to 29.7 is the estimated difference between those significantly different or not.

Let me just go back one slide. Right. So that that's the comparison here between this slope.

Simple slope. And this simple slope. Right. The 24 to 29.7.

And then we have here 24.5 to 34.8.

That's comparing this slope to this slope. And then lastly the 29.7 to the 34.8.

So what is this test telling us? Right.

So if we were looking at these lines here, which again, that's sort of at the mean above the mean one standard deviation or below the mean.

This is actually telling us that all of these simple slopes are significantly different from each other.

That's what each of these pairwise contrast tells us based on the t value and the p value, they're all less than our 0.05 cut off.

So you can see this looks pretty similar to even this other plot we had before,

where one standard deviation below the mean has this kind of flat slope relatively flat, and that increases.

And those are all different from each other. Does this make sense to many of you?

Hopefully. Okay.

So just to try to recap this, right.

So um, if we are testing and interaction in this case, we just looked at a pairwise interaction between two variables.

And we looked at well how could we kind of solve what these simple slopes are,

knowing the coefficients for our overall regression and plugging that into these simple slopes equations.

Making plots of those so we could actually just visualise and try to think

through what does this interaction mean at different levels of one variable?

How is the relationship between the x and the Y.

And then actually statistically testing whether the simple slope estimates are actually different from each other or not?

So hopefully this gives you some tools for thinking about how I can unpack and interaction.

And, uh, if you had a categorical regression.

Categorical predictors like I started with, then you don't need to do this extra step of.

Creating this plus or minus one standard deviation around the mean.

Because you would just use your. Categories to understand the interaction.

Any questions? So the exercises for today will be.

So we'll be in the practical session this week rather than in lecture.

Um, but now that that was all I had for today.

So, uh, please do attend that to work on the interaction stuff.

And then next week we'll actually go more into unpacking categorical regression, different types of coding systems,

and how we can interpret our regression coefficients based on different types of categories and interactions between them.

I'm happy to stick around if anyone wants to talk more about this or any other stats stuff.

Um, just let me know. Thanks.

And, uh, short day today, but, uh, see you next week. Five for you.

I don't like moderation. Uh, let's say, for example, some of the ones that I, uh, you.

Know, um, and usually we try to restrict something that.

Somebody. See.

I haven't tried. Well, I didn't hear from.

You. Um, so.

So. Uh, yeah, I did, um.

It's okay. The.

Only thing. So how long ago did you notice?

Um, you can always, uh. To be honest with you.

You know, um, on campus, then I know. I'm always looking.

To see if. It's a pretty short.

Okay. Let's test. Having to say.

Hello and see. We're working. What's.

I like this research question, but we're not sure to like. A problem.

Yeah. Okay. So you can talk about that time. Uh, uh, for reasons, right?

Um, so imagine because you were talking about.

You had exploratory. Um. Other one.

Yeah. Yeah. Uh, what if we just tried to replicate the behaviour?

Flocking to bread throwing. Uh, it's not over yet.

Yes. That's right. Oh, no. Too early? Yes.

Why is it so short? Yeah. Well, I'm, uh, I'm talking with them, and then you'll be next.

But I'm happy to talk with you after if you want. Okay.

But then after yesterday, you showed a lot of graphs and data and stuff.

But out of a model like that, we can get data like that.

Maybe a bit by changing variables. Yeah. So we were just thinking what exactly does the output need to be actually.

And what. Is with that kind of model.

So the question was about. Pigeon looking for food?

Yeah, I guess one of the research questions could. Uh, beer like.

Like brothers and healthy. So how does the amount of bread affect their health?

Yeah, it's not really a. Girl problem.

So, uh, I mean, this that still would account for, like, a multi-agent system interaction.

Uh, I think, uh. There you do have a clear way that you could analyse the amount of crumbs of bread crumbs that they.

Now you could come up with some other. That you can find out with different scenario metrics that you could.

Um. I think there's other things too, that some people have also looked at turtles and, uh, like incidences of them, like getting plastic on that too.

Uh, that kind of affected the population overall.

So there's definitely something you can do. So this would be like a balance thing too.

I think it's a good start. Okay. Yeah. But then you would want to kind of refine what is the question.

Yeah. Yeah that's a good. Yeah. So the question is can we just recreate this concept digitally is my opinion.

Well, then you have to. I think then you would want to compare it to something else, right.

So you could say, how does our simulation of pigeon, uh, flocking to feed bread relate to some real world data on that?

Um, but just just having the implementation and then, um, like, can we do this thing?

That's I see that more as the starting point. And then what can you do with that model.

Right. What kind of questions could you try to answer a bit beyond just the implementation?

Yeah. Does that help for now? Yes. And if you, uh, if you ever find something, get it written down or have some initial thing working.

Thank you. Have another quick question. Does an octopus counts as a system?

Are you, like, modelling the limbs? Uh, individually? I was thinking about that.

You would need physics and stuff for that. But it's just in general.

Is it a multi-agency? It has also like a distributed nervous system.

At least the last time I checked. True, but the brains are.

That's what they say. Yeah. I mean, it could be something that you model in that way.

Uh, that's kind of where we've talked a bit before about where do we define our system boundaries.

And it depends on what our question is.

You could also look at the population of neurones within a single person that are still interacting and put together multi-agent systems to massively.

Yeah. Okay.

See you next time, though. Um, I actually have to talk to or someone.

I did. Do you want. To go over, um, email or canvas because it goes into email.

Then it can get lost. Okay. Yeah. You know, with canvas.

Then I can, um, it gets linked to the course, and then it's okay.

Yeah, I did, uh, you know, I need to take a over. What was your name again?

Uh, my name's Frida. Uh. Yeah.

And last name? Can you. Okay.

You. So it's not in my email.

Because I got an untrue. In Congress.

Who are. Yeah. And I said, I emailed you, but then she urged me to email her.

And, uh, no, she told me that there was no way to email it to her, but, um.

So then this is. Should be, uh, kind of to the left.

Yeah. So I try to keep the. Teaching related stuff.

Okay. Let's to us. Yeah. Um, and Barbara and Sasha are the ones organising for the practicals.

So, uh, we do have to be kind of strict with.

It's beyond the release date or something. Yeah. Which is why we do have our, um.

Leniency policy. And are you are you aware that you can still get points if you missed more than two?

And so. Yeah, just just just because I've done it. That's why I wanted to, like, at least try it, I guess.

Yeah. Okay. Um, this was a couple of weeks ago. Yeah.

Yeah. Um. And you emailed right after the line.

Um, yeah. I think this was the same day or.

Yeah. It's worth the fortune. And what did Barbara say?

Uh, no. I sent her again because she said that it came true.

Um, so I was like, okay, can you show me your email? So I type it correctly, and now I think she got it, or she said.

Who were you also there in person. You know.

Um. You can still send it.

And then we probably have to discuss as a team what our position is on it.

Because again, now that it's much, much later.

Yeah, I can try because PDF is in my computer and you can see the time when I made okay.

So it's in the time range. Yeah, yeah. And I mean I usually like to give the benefit of the doubt.

Uh, I just try to have something that's clearly enforceable.

Yeah. It's just in forever. Yeah. It's also hard as it is use.

So when I get distracted, I want to take. And then, of course, if you get distracted, the time.

Yep. I, uh. Uh, I can understand.

Does it make sense to look anymore at what we were looking at today?

I think I need to get into it myself bit before then.

I can my ask questions. Okay. And, uh, uh, they're going to go through an example as well.

Yeah. Yeah. I always that's. Yeah, I think I first for to get it myself and then if I have questions to ask.

I saw from one of the other students that the link, the one that I have up here was broken.

Um, so now it should be fixed. The one that was for this week that you said the shorts.

Uh. Well. This one. Yeah. Oh, okay.

So if you check through that one. Look at the slides again.

Yeah. That might help. Yeah. Are you?

I've. Yeah, we did the first course, uh, last year of statistics, and I did quite well.

I've never done this before, so. But now I think I have, you know, it's really like understand.

So that's why I think I'm was. Not everything,

but I would say it's a good if you have a bit of mental capacity to try to feel

like you are comfortable with the basic multiple regression and to interpret it,

now is a good time to put. Some effort into that.

Yeah. Before it gets a bit long. Yeah. Because we're just going to add in more layers of complexity.

Yeah. Yeah I think uh, it is all passing through a bit like from last year.

Yeah. So, so I think because now this regression is back over you.

Yeah. So I think. But I'll try.

Thank you. Okay. Thank you for that. And, uh, see you next time out.

Yeah. Yeah. I.

