[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Good afternoon everyone. I think the microphone is working all right.

Yeah. Nice to see you here for stats two today.

Hello. Can you hear this like feedback as well?

No, it's a bit better this one. But, uh, maybe it just depends where I stand.

Uh. It's better. Okay, so stats two today.

Multiple regression with polynomials. Let's take a look where we're at for the course we are in the last month of the course.

And actually you see we have including today three more lectures that I'll introduce some new material.

And uh, that means actually that this will take us through the next three weeks.

And then the last meeting that we have in November, uh, will be a course wrap up and exam Q&A.

And then actually, we won't need that first meeting in December.

I'll, uh, I'll remind you of this as we get a bit closer of that.

Um, but one thing I wanted to draw your attention to, and I've said it a couple times throughout the semester,

is these last three modules, especially the last two.

It is, uh, they do get to become the most difficult.

So I really encourage you to, uh, make sure to come to lecture, to go to the practical sessions if you're finding this material challenging,

because we're going to shift from to add some more complexity to our multiple regression into mixed models and growth curves.

Luckily, we kind of been building up to this point. So for example, today we're adding polynomials and whatever that is.

And that actually comes back here in the growth curve part.

But I know you have a lot to manage in the coming weeks before the end of the semester,

so just make sure that if you find this challenging, uh, try to clarify any misunderstandings you might have, let me know.

Uh, but, uh, teaching assistants know, so you'll be well prepared by the end of the semester.

These are also kind of my favourite, uh, lectures in the coming weeks, too, because I like the complexity of these types of models.

Um, so they're challenging, but I think they're, um, it can be rewarding,

especially if you're able to use them in your, uh, research or your projects or your thesis and so on.

Okay. Could you join me, please unmute, clap for just a few questions, see where you're at with some of your stats knowledge that we've covered.

Also while you're joining the Posit Connect server is should also be live.

So if you already signed up for this last week, you can actually access the link here in the modules.

Um. It's just right here.

Or you can actually just log in with the link from before and you can choose lecture ten if you want to follow along here.

Give you another, uh, 10s or so to join.

If you just came in. Otherwise, you can type it in. All right.

Looks like we are ready. First one.

What is the intercept represent in multiple regression using dummy coding for three groups.

Note that. Out of the way. Got the timer running on this one too.

Well. 10s left. All right.

How did you do? A lot of you got this one correct.

So just thinking back to what we covered last week, whenever we did dummy coding,

we were always comparing our parts of our model to our reference group.

Um, if you said grand mean, that was a different type of coding that we covered.

I don't want to remember which type. Yeah.

Yeah, the unweighted effects. So then, then we were looking at that grand mean for our intercept.

If you put this one. So change in mean for a given category relative to the reference group.

What part of our model output which is not the intercept would tell us this.

Anyone remember that when we were looking at the dummy coding output?

There's a you got a smile? Maybe. You know. Uh, the.

Yeah. So the beta coefficient, uh, the regression coefficient, whatever we want to call them,

those values where the change in the mean relative to our reference group, which is the intercept.

Good. So this can be a bit tricky to keep straight.

How we interpret our intercept and coefficient based on which of the types of coding system we used.

And I added in three groups here. It's a bit irrelevant because it doesn't matter how many groups for this question.

That intercept will always be uh, interpreted as the mean of the reference group.

Welcome. All right. You predict a quadratic relationship between your x and y.

What order polynomial should you test? 10s.

Last chance. All right.

Majority of you also got this one right. To the two is the correct answer here.

Second order polynomial. Polynomial gives us a quadratic relationship.

We're going to look at this today. If you did the reading you already know this I guess if you didn't maybe you put four.

Uh that would be uh, quartic relationship.

Um, we're going to unpack these all. If you have never heard of polynomial until today, well, you're in luck.

Last question. How are you feeling about your current understanding of the stats material covered so far in this course?

Maybe we can, uh, do this one real time.

See how normal we can make our distribution. If you're feeling like a 1 or 2.

Um. You know, what I can recommend is going back and checking some of the lectures, trying to see which you found most difficult.

Looking through the worked examples from the code that I provided.

Talk with me, the teaching assistants. Um, you'll have a time.

Time for this as well. Uh, in the coming months in classes and practicals, but also, uh, in the Q&A session.

Um, if you're up here, then that's good. Uh, at least you're feeling confident.

Hopefully your knowledge matches your confidence, uh, as well.

And, uh, yeah, if you're in the middle, I guess you're feeling average about it.

So that's perhaps representative. I hope by the end everyone is going to be at least a three or above for their stats knowledge.

But, uh, we have to, uh, see if we can get you there.

Okay, so as I said, if you want to follow along for the.

Exercises or some of the lecture it should match.

Mostly in here.

I'm still going to go through with my slides a normal format, not a full transition to this format today, although it would in principle work.

Um, okay. Any questions though, on the quiz questions I showed up here.

Everyone's feeling of five, at least on those questions.

So what we're going to cover today is whatever this thing, polynomial regression is, when we would want to use it, how we can do that in R.

And we're going to have like two kind of longer exercises focussed on doing that.

I'm going to introduce orthogonal polynomials to you, whatever that is.

Uh, after the exercise I have a few slides on those.

What they are. Um, but then you're going to work with these more on your practical exercise.

Uh, later in the week. Thursday. So how many of you saw polynomials for the first time when you, uh, saw it on the slides when you came in?

Anyone. Maybe not wanting to admit it in principle, you should maybe have had something related to polynomials when you have taken algebra before,

but it could certainly be a while since you had that.

Um, the whole idea, though, it goes back to algebra and thinking about equations for lines or different types of lines that might have curves in them.

Um, so a constant polynomial function is one actually,

where it doesn't really matter if there's a relationship or there isn't a relationship between any of the variables that are included in there.

Um, but mostly we've been looking at something just like this a linear polynomial function.

Right. That looks just like our regression equation or our formula for a line that we've been using.

That would be one of these, uh, kind of straight lines, like the blue one here.

And all we're doing is adding exponential terms or polynomials into this equation.

So here's an example where we add the squared term of x and x,

or a cubic term in this quadratic term, or any general form of higher degree of polynomial.

So we can go up to whatever number you think of.

Although we'll talk about practically. Does that even make sense for the empirical modelling you might do.

Maybe you had to, uh, solve quadratic equations by hand in some algebra courses you had years ago.

I know I did. Um, we don't have to do them by hand.

Uh, we're going to be looking at whether, you know, different curves, uh, fit our data.

So why would we need to think about this? Uh, my image got a bit un centred here.

Sorry about that. Yeah.

So there could be a theoretical reason, right?

Uh, I mean, you might have been saying this from, you know, six weeks ago.

What if the relationship between my predictors and my outcome is not a straight line?

I hope some of you at least thought that, um, well, maybe you have a theory that there's a curvilinear relationship, right?

That that it's not just this straight line, but there's some other shape to it.

A common one is the, uh, Yerkes Dodson law,

this relationship between stress or arousal and performance on a task that's theorised to have this kind of,

uh, inverted U or quadratic curve, right, where, like, the best performance you'll get was with the right amount of stress.

Not too much and not too little.

Um, and this paper here that I did, uh, with some colleagues, we were interested in understanding the relationship between,

uh, electro, uh, neurophysiological activity and working memory.

Uh, and we thought that perhaps certain regions of the brain might have, uh, different relationship with working memory,

uh, following this kind of curve, which you can kind of see as we plot different electrode sites here, uh, and there, um.

DFA exponent, which is not important for you to understand, but just an example of where we had some prediction about, um.

This relationship so kind of theoretical with some empirical support.

So that's the first approach, right. We might just have a good theoretical reason to predict such a relationship.

Empirically, we've already seen some of these examples.

I think I showed you these same plots before, but if you were inspecting the output of your linear model.

And you saw some curve like this when you look at your fit versus your residual.

I said there might be a problem with your linearity assumption there, right?

It looks curved. If you look at the fit versus the residual, that's a good empirical reason to say this model doesn't seem to fit that well.

There might be some other trend that's being underlying the data.

So you might need to consider polynomials. So this is empirical right.

So you check your scatterplots or you're checking your assumptions for any of these.

And if you see something that looks nonlinear ish or curvilinear that's a good time to, uh, say maybe I need to test this.

And this comes back to our model building approach that we're taking in this course, right.

That, um, we might have a theoretical prediction, like, we just want to test the relationship between our predictor variable and our outcome.

And is it a good fit or not? But now, you know, we're thinking we've looked at adding interaction terms.

So we then say okay we have our predictor two predictors maybe and a possible interaction.

Does that fit better. Uh if we have the interaction versus not.

Or does our model fit better if we have a polynomial term or not?

Um, that's the type of thinking that we are kind of going to be looking at comparing here.

There's one more thing that I want to add here.

So sometimes people call it a non-linear relationship.

Right? Because we know that our, uh. Simple linear regression.

It is a line, so that is linear. Polynomial models are, in a way linear and nonlinear.

And what I mean by that is. Uh, I'm skipping around a bit.

Sorry for that. Our equation is still a linear combination of the terms.

So we don't have nonlinear terms in our model.

You could look up nonlinear regression, for example, and you'll get, um, actually coefficients that are uh,

and predictors that are raised to a different powers in a way that is quite different than what we're covering with, uh, polynomial.

So it is nonlinear in the sense that.

Uh, what we're modelling is not just a straight line, but the equations that we're using to estimate them are still linear equations.

I hope that makes sense.

So for polynomial regression, as you maybe already realise by now, the degree of the polynomial determines the number of points of inflection.

So when I gave you the quadratic example in the quiz.

And ask you how many, uh, what's the polynomial order that was to.

So two for the red line, which is quadratic here. But there's one point of inflection, right?

So in that curve, there's one point where sort of the direction of the line is changing.

If we look back at this, uh, example, right.

One point of inflection around here or so before the direction starts changing, as we increase that, then we have more points of inflection, right?

So our cubic line which is the dashed green one here we have now two points of inflection,

something like here and something around here where the sort of direction changes.

So D minus one. Uh, points of inflection.

In our models, we have to include all lower order term.

So just like when you did an interaction term in your model,

you needed to have the predictors by themselves and together as an interaction term, we need to include all lower order terms.

So if we do a cubic model, we also have to have a coefficient in there for quadratic and linear and our constant or intercept.

Maybe one point. To add to that,

I meant to mention here there's sort of zero order or constant polynomial that's actually just a base model of the mean predicting the outcome, right?

So when we're making our comparison of our linear model for regression, right, we're actually doing that F test.

And seeing is the predictors the linear combination of predictors a better fit than just the mean.

So this ties it back to that in a way. Oh.

So you might say. Well, how many?

All. In what order polynomial do I need to use? Right?

Um, you could just keep increasing them until you get like the maximum r squared value.

Then you have like a really good fit for your data. Right. Uh, but the problem is that you can overfit your data.

Right. So if you think about the number of points of inflection,

if you went really high in terms of your polynomial order, you would just get some like really curvy line.

That's just fitting every point.

And then maybe if you were trying to generalise from your sample to the population, you've overfit your data and it wouldn't generalise well.

We're not really looking at. Like assessing generalisability in this class.

You do this to some extent in machine learning, right? Where you do, uh, some.

Test and, uh, training and test sets.

For example, you could apply the same type of logic here with polynomial models.

Do it on a subset of your sample, uh, and then see how well that fits an unseen sample.

Um, but but we're not going to cover that. Um.

So be careful of that. Practical significance versus statistical significance.

This is again thinking about what you can interpret like which order polynomial is still interpretable.

Um, with regard to understanding the relationship between your predictors and your outcome.

Um, welcome. Sometimes we might see statistical significance for some really high order polynomial.

But then is it that meaningful or interpretive interpretable.

That's what we would be wanting to figure out. And the coefficients.

Tell us the direction and strength or depth of the curve.

It's kind of easy if we see sort of like just a quadratic model, then we have like a positive or negative quadratic term,

and we can tell like from that which shape the curve is like whether it's like a U or an inverted U.

But once we get a bit higher, uh, in terms of polynomial order.

The best way to understand it is just to plot it, right? So plot the the fitted values of the model, the predicted line of the model.

That's what I have here. So when you really want to interpret them, you should just plot them.

Plot your predicted line versus your fitted your your observed data.

The quadratic term. Again easy to interpret.

If it's positive the curve is opening upwards like in a U, and if it's negative, then it's, uh, opening downward.

Maybe, um, when we're thinking about polynomial coefficients and how to interpret them,

often it's really about which order polynomial model is the better fit of the data.

As opposed to really trying to interpret specifically the coefficients.

And what I mean by that is, um. Maybe when we're doing simple linear regression and we talked about Unstandardised coefficients,

that we could really see the relationship between, uh, changes in our coefficient and our outcome.

Right. We wrote out those equations and we could plug values in.

Once we get to polynomials, it's a bit less about the interpretation of those particular coefficients,

especially as you get to higher order polynomials.

But really about sort of the trend that you're observing and how that changes, uh, in your model.

Any questions so far? Before we look at this, how to do this in our.

Okay. So there's a couple of ways we can create polynomial terms.

We could do them manually right. So we could say I want to look at the relationship between arousal and performance.

Like if we were testing some Yorkies dogs log data, which we will actually do.

You could actually create this as your sort of.

Quadratic term or your cubic term I just multiplying the variable against itself the number of times that you need to create that polynomial term.

Or we can do it, uh, in our uh regression formula.

So we can have. This embedded within the LM function.

And then we have our outcome variable a predictor.

And then use this AI with parentheses.

And then whichever order polynomial term we want to use.

So this would be for the quadratic model. If you want it to do cubic, then you could add plus a predictor to the third power and so on.

And then you will get uh you know. So for this model we would get a linear like line coefficient and we would get the green one like this.

An estimate of that at least. Okay, uh, let's try this out.

So I'm going to give you some time to load this data set.

This one is on on canvas under the module a CSV file.

If you're working in the posit server, the data should already be loaded there.

You can interact in that browser if you need some help getting access to that, let me know.

As usual, you should inspect this data frame.

What's going on with these data? What? Descriptive statistics.

What do they tell you? And then try out just a linear model.

So simple linear regression predicting for perf which is performance uh as the outcome.

Uh predicting that from arousal as your predictor. Interpret those then check your assumptions.

So maybe look at your fit versus residual histogram and so on.

And then try to run a quadratic model and interpret the results.

And so see how those compare. I'll give you some time to get started on this before I'll come around.

Check in with some of you, uh, before we come back together and look through the example collectively.

And if you need any help, just wave me over. A little bit past when we usually take a break.

How many of you are totally finished? Just a quick show of hands.

Okay, some. Most of you are finished, some still working.

I would say, uh, let's do a ten minute break today.

Uh, so we'll start back at, uh, 146.

Uh, if you're already finished and you're not having a longer break, you can wave me over and we can look together at your output.

Otherwise, when we come back, I will go through my output together.

Hello. All right, that's our ten minutes, I think.

Yeah. Um, let's take a look at this example together.

Uh, here I have my R markdown file, uh, which you can access after lecture where I load the data.

And I use that handy describe function to quickly give me all of those descriptive.

So. Well, I told you this is some arousal and performance data.

Uh, it is simulated data, but. So we don't know what the units are.

But you would think, for example. Well, the average arousal is 207, whatever that means.

There's a range of 50 there. The average performance is 88.

Uh, only a range of 11 or so.

Just to have some intuition for what those values are and the range and whether they're distributed in a normal way or not.

Make a nice plot scatter plot. There's not a lot of observations here.

Only 18. Um, but when you look at this, if you were doing your guess the correlation like you did way back,

uh, several months ago, maybe you would say it doesn't look like it's correlated, right?

You could probably could maybe picture something through the middle or maybe something like that.

But it's hard to say for sure. So here I ran first a linear model.

Right. So I'm saving it as modelling.

That's just my name to remind it that it's my linear model using that LM function.

Outcome is performance predicted by arousal and reference to my data frame,

and getting the summary of my model because I want that full, uh, summary of the linear model.

Right. Let's make sure we're all on board on how to interpret this.

So I would again start from the bottom and I would see this F-test.

Right. Which is telling. Does this model fit better than the mean.

So the model with whatever we put in it, which in this case is just this arousal variable.

And we see the f statistic is quite close to zero and the p value is quite high, not anywhere near r 0.05 or lower value.

And r squared is about 1% of the variability is explained by this this model.

And then we see our arousal predictor also a small coefficient.

But we would need to standardise it to know how small and t value close to £0.00 value.

Pretty much the same as our p value here. Doesn't seem to be a relationship between these predictors and the outcome.

Uh, but our intercept we can see is non-zero at least from this t value in this p value.

So you might have done some like experiment to collect this data.

And then you saw this. And you might be disappointed because you thought I predicted a relationship between arousal and performance.

But my model doesn't tell me there is any.

Well, if you looked at, for example, the fit versus the residuals, you know, they're not very evenly distributed across this space.

If you look at the histogram, I don't see that much there.

The q-q plot is a bit bumpy, so maybe you would think that there might be.

Some other relationship in here, like a quadratic one.

If I didn't tell you that. Um, I added this one to, uh, nothing that's too clear in this one, though, related to.

I think the clearest one is maybe this one, but I would actually want to see a lot more data points, I think from this it's a bit sparse.

So anyways, from this I would decide that I should do a quadratic model, which I specified here as squad that has almost a nice rhyme to it.

Uh, and then I add to my arousal.

Plus I uh arousal squared.

So with the carrot on your six key. Right.

So we want to explain performance like how well someone did on a task from their arousal level plus the square of the arousal term.

So we've now moved from simple linear regression to multiple linear regression.

And it's polynomial. So polynomial regression our output looks quite different right.

If you had spent months collecting this data and you had this output, you might think,

well here there's something more interesting than the model you saw before.

So our F statistic has gotten quite higher, quite further from zero.

Our degrees of freedom changed a little bit because we now have one more predictor and the model p value just above 0.01.

So also below our 0.05 threshold r squared value changed from 0.01 now to 0.43.

But it's multiple regression. So we would be better off checking out our adjusted R squared.

So about 0.36. Both of these terms are significant predictors, right?

Arousal squared is significant with this high well low T value and, uh, low p value.

And same for arousal. And this intercept has changed quite a bit uh, which um.

Just keep in mind that it's now fitting like a plane to the the data, because it's a multiple regression rather than simple linear regression.

So what would I kind of conclude from this? Well, I would see.

That this seems to fit much better than the date then than just the linear model.

Uh, a quadratic term that's negative, which, if you remember from the slides.

What that if it's negative right. You have that curve opening downward.

So a U-shape. So that's what you could mainly see from that coefficient.

So it's good to just at least remember these ones. Uh, but yeah, when you add in higher order terms, uh, you don't necessarily.

Can't really remember that anymore. Um, any questions on how to do the, uh.

Quadratic polynomial. How to compare them. Or sorry we're doing comparing next, but how to interpret it?

Yeah. Twice. Uh. Now.

Yeah. So this is a great observation. Uh, and that's part of why I had.

This. That's not what I had. Um, this point on this slides about.

Uh. Sort of the relative interpretation here because as you add like all of those higher order terms,

it can change the significance of the lower order terms,

uh, because of how the variability is getting accounted for based on fitting that term, fitting the higher order term.

So it could be, you see, with the quadratic model that there is, uh,

a significant linear relationship because the quadratic term is accounting for other sources of variability first and then uh,

accounting for that linear one. But then maybe you add the cubic term and then those could change again.

Uh, which is why we need to do like the comparison of fit and how you go from like the linear up to higher order polynomials,

which one has the best fit, because that's the one that we can be confident in, whether those terms are sort of stably significant or not.

Does that help at all?

Yeah, it has to do with, uh, in short, the partial of variance getting allocated to each of these different shapes as their fit to the data.

But it's a really good thing to, uh, to pay attention to, because when you, you wouldn't then say.

Because this one might be the best fitting model. So it is actually that the quadratic term best characterises the data,

but that there still is this significant linear pattern in there, while first accounting for like the quadratic trend.

Good question. Anyone else.

Did anyone try to specify their model? Uh, without this part and just this one?

Is that a yes or no? I forget?

Uh, maybe if someone tries that. It might by default, include the lower order terms.

Could someone try it real quick? And let me know.

So in some cases, it actually knows that you need to have a lower order term.

So it might do it by default. But I didn't check it before lecture today.

Uh, that's important to know, though, because you don't want to make that mistake of.

Only including the quadratic term without the lower order polynomial, because then your.

Coefficients will not be interpretable.

They won't be stable. Did you try? Yeah.

And it doesn't include that. No. You tried as well. Yeah.

Okay. So make sure to, uh, write them all out.

So if we wanted to do a quick model, what we would do here is we would add a plus sign, and I would just copy this and then change that to a three.

So then we would have our first order. Second order, third order.

Uh, if we wanted to do a quick for example. If you are, um, not sure how to interpret these.

Uh. And you didn't ask that question just now. Uh, you can also look at these write ups that will be available there, too.

Uh, just so you can make sure you know how to interpret them. Keep clicking the wrong file.

Um, okay. So just briefly, um, before we go back to comparing them.

We're doing. What we're doing here is really the same as our multiple regression.

Just again, we're adding into that output whatever polynomial terms.

Right. So now our b two rather than b two being applied to a different x variable like x1 and x2, it's the square of x.

You can combine these in different ways right. So you could say well I have like an X1 and x2.

But I think for x one it might have a quadratic relationship but x2 doesn't.

So you could just include like your x1 and your x1 squared and then your x2.

Um, so that's part of why we spend all of this time looking at these different ways

to tweak or model different things within this kind of regression framework,

because you can really expand it to whatever case you need, whether that's theoretical or empirical.

What I'd like you to try next. Hopefully you still have your models saved and up.

I want you to compare the model so you can use the Anova.

Uh, you can look at the I see if you remember, maybe extract AIC or the performance, uh, function to get that which model fits better.

And what's the change in R squared. And then check the check to see if you see any issues with multicollinearity for your, um, quadratic model.

Let's, uh, let's take a look together, um, so we can interpret this way to compare them.

Then I'll cover one more topic, uh, and then we'll wrap up for the day.

Um, yeah. So. What we wanted to do here was next compare the model.

So in this case we saw quite distinct results.

Right. Like this one here was only 1% of the variability and the other was above 35 or something.

It's not always the case that you have such a clear difference in the R-squared.

But we want to do this for the sake of completeness anyway. So if we ran this Anova where we enter in our linear model separated by a comma,

and our quadratic model, those ones I saved from before we get this output like we looked at before.

This tells us, right, whether the variability accounted for by these two models that I put in here is different or not.

Right. So it's doing an F-test on the, uh, the variability accounted for by them.

And it is significant, which we see with this high f value and low p value quite small.

And then we would have to look back to our model summaries to get the R-squared.

That tells us how big that R-squared difference was.

I have it down here below, I think in a second. I was.

It was about. Uh, .31 difference.

I, uh, I think, okay, so this is what I was trying to do is to compare performance.

You could do extract, I see, uh, like this, but I like this one because you can, uh, just enter in both your models like you do with the Anova.

And then you get all of these AIC values, your R squared and your and your error metric Rmse.

Um, and we see that, uh, AIC is lower for the quadratic model.

Uh, error is lower and the r squared is much higher for the quadratic.

We could make this spider web plot, which I showed before, where the better fitting indices are the ones that take up more space on the plot.

So quadratic again here. Visually at least we see better fitting than just the linear model.

We should have known this already from our output, but all cases aren't so clear.

Quadratic model here is fitting better. Um, I had this on there as well to check for issues with multicollinearity.

So if I use my check model function from the performance package.

You probably saw this, uh, where we have these, uh, high collinearity issues between our predictors.

Um, and but all of the assumptions with gvm are acceptable.

And if we look at the correlation between these variables manually.

So here I just took, I created a manual, uh squared version of the variable and correlated it with the original.

And you'll see that it's very highly correlated. So do we need to worry about it.

Um, maybe. Uh, so it to some extent, when we are creating these polynomial terms, we know they're going to be correlated.

Because they're just simple computations of each other.

If you're just squaring it or cubing it. Uh, we will see that they're related.

Um. Do I want to show this first? Uh, I'll come back to that.

So. I think we can almost assume by default that there's going to be multicollinearity whenever we do polynomial models.

Um, anytime we're taking a second, third order or higher polynomial term.

But there's sometimes there can be different sources of polynomial, uh, of multicollinearity.

Um, some of them which are sort of, uh, non-essential, like, uh, due to scaling of a non-zero mean, which we could try to correct by centring.

This may reduce multicollinearity.

Not always. Um, also in the structure of our data, we could have some multicollinearity.

If there is non symmetric non symmetry in the distribution of our x variable which we could then try to solve with orthogonal polynomial regression.

I think there's, uh. Oh one.

Check. There's a couple of things that, uh, you could consider here.

So typically, if you follow best practices for polynomial regression modelling,

you could test if centring changes your results or if orthogonal polynomials, which I'll define in a second, changes your results.

Most often I find that the if your data set is sufficient enough if your effect, your observing is reliable enough.

These issues with multicollinearity and the possible ways to solve it.

Um, they usually give consistent results.

If I found, uh, for example, that there was a significant quadratic term in a good fitting model with non centred non orthogonal polynomial terms,

and then that changed when I tried this. Then I would be concerned.

I would think okay, maybe the effect I was observing is really conflated by this, uh, multicollinearity problem.

If I tried these because I saw, for example, that high multicollinearity problem and then the results were the same, then I would think, okay,

my effect is there and it's robust to this issue of multicollinearity, even when I try to give some solutions for trying to mitigate that.

Does that make sense? So kind of like when you had problems, uh, with some of your other analyses,

and you do a nonparametric equivalent and hopefully you'll see it will give you the same interpretation.

Not always, but the same kind of thinking applies here as well overall.

So I will show very briefly the orthogonal, the thinking behind the orthogonal polynomials.

Uh, you'll work with these in the practical. And then I'll still have a bit of time to quickly show you a bit more of my analysis.

So the whole idea between the orthogonal polynomials is that you just create a transformation of your polynomial terms, uh,

so that you're kind of maximising, uh, the projected distance of these values in a way that reduces the, uh, the correlation.

So this is like a simplification of, of creating some sort of orthogonal polynomials.

Um, if you want to go into depth on how you calculate this and why it works, um, I put some links in here that you can check out.

In, uh, in AR, you can actually just use the poly function in your linear model.

So I would, uh, maybe you right now check out the help for the poly function so you can see some

examples of how to apply that because that will come up on your practical,

um. Later this week. But as with any transformations to our variables.

This does make them harder to interpret. Right.

So we're we're getting further and further away from our original units that we have for our variables.

Uh, and then it makes it, yeah, harder to directly relate to our original metric.

So we're always trying to balance this.

Like can we solve statistical problems that might be giving us a problem with the inferences we are making with our model,

versus can we actually interpret the output of our model?

Um, this paper was mentioned here. Um, in the old days, apparently before I was born, in 79.

Uh, there was issues that, uh, for example, polynomial terms were more efficient.

Uh, in some cases, if they're orthogonal for higher order fits and they took less computing time.

I think now those differences are really negligible.

Um, but it shows sort of that, uh, ordinary polynomials, uh, when you test the significance on your parameters,

you have this kind of non independence versus independence with this transformation that can,

uh, make them, um, giving some better, more accurate results in some cases.

You'll try this out in the, uh, practical.

But I want to come back briefly to my analysis real quick before we close off.

So. Here's an example that you could copy for how to plot like your data versus the fit from the model.

Uh, so this is actually taking out, uh, the saving out the predicted values, uh, there and uh, putting them here in a line.

So this would be the predicted quadratic effect for that, uh, output.

Yeah. Right?

Yeah. Yeah, but we can still have both depending on the way the data are distributed as well.

So we are going to have essential with the polynomials because of the structure of the creation of the polynomial terms,

but also depending on how the data are distributed, that would be the non-essential.

Here I put in the cubic model. So if you want to see how that goes.

Um, again, you need to include all lower order terms.

So I added here to my quadratic model the cubic term.

And if you were going to do an orthogonal polynomial one you could do poly here instead of I.

Notice how the pattern of results changes.

See you later. Uh.

I'm sorry. Right now. No longer do we see.

Uh, that all of these terms are significant RF value and the overall model are still pretty good.

The R squared is kind of similar, but once we account for this potential cubic trend, all of those effects then go away.

So how I would first interpret this is actually like okay, probably a cubic fit is not the right fit for this data,

which I would then need to compare the performance of these models.

And so I probably had a prediction from the beginning that quadratic was the best fit.

And then I saw my linear model didn't look good. My quadratic model looked pretty good.

And my cubic model. While the overall model info looks all right, the specific predictors or relationships I expected don't.

And if we look at the performance I well we can look quickly here.

We see a bit more of a complicated picture right. Our linear model still has the worst performance.

Our quadratic one across the board has the best indicators here.

But the cubic ones are. They're also pretty close on some dimensions.

All right. We only had a five minute break, so I'll wrap up in one minute or so.

We had a ten minute break, not five.

Um, so we might use polynomial regression when we have a predicted curvilinear relationship between our variables.

Or maybe we're checking our assumptions and we see curve like patterns in our, uh, plots like the fit versus the residual.

We need to iteratively add our polynomial terms in increasing order.

So going from first order of second or third order and so on, and iteratively compare the fit,

we can stop when we no longer have a better fitting model, or when we think that we have the theoretically predicted model.

And we test one level above that. We always need to compare these models.

So and uh, you might have to consider some cases where you have highly correlated terms in them and

centre or use orthogonal polynomials to see if that changes your pattern of results.

In practice, if your data are good quality, you won't see a difference usually.

Have fun on the practical. Later this week and next week, we'll get into mixed effects models.

