[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Good afternoon everybody. This will be the first time of two times that you might see me today.

Lucky. Uh, like. Yes. Um, our last stats two lecture today.

Exciting, right? Uh, some of you are, uh, maybe ready to move on from statistics to other topics.

Some of you will be sad. You know, you're going to miss out on more stats.

We will have a meeting, uh, next week.

I'll say more about that at the end of the lecture today. Um, but for now, we're going to be talking about growth curve modelling.

Slash still mixed models. And yeah, as I already said we are here.

Last lecture. Um, which is uh exciting.

But you know that means that next things are coming soon.

Exams, projects. Um, hopefully a winter break for some of you before getting into your new topics next semester.

Let's, as usual, start with our woo clap questions I have for for you today.

I will give the disclaimer as well that these do feature like full output from the models.

So what shows up on the screen will not be complete.

You'll have to check on your devices to see the full output.

Have any of you checked? Uh, timed it to see if any exams show up there yet.

Yeah. Did you see anything for stats? Yeah.

Okay. Maybe this is also your friendly reminder, too, that you do need to register for your exams if you don't register.

I can't do anything about it. Like, uh.

It's very unfortunate. So do make sure to do that so that you can actually participate in the exams.

Although it looks like stats two is scheduled December 15th.

I don't know if it's just a preview or if it's there for everyone.

So check your time. Edit. And I'm talking about exams because I think maybe at least this first question, maybe the second one too,

might be kind of an example of something that you might get on the exam like here is some are outputs.

Here are four possible. Things that you could interpret from that output.

Which of them is true or which of them is not true? So let's go on and go to the first one.

I will bend it a bit so we can see part of it.

But again, you need to check the full output output on your device.

So this one is asking which of the following has the correct random effect structure based on the information provided here?

About ten more seconds for this one. For the last few. All right.

Let's see. Oh, this one is tricky.

Um. So maybe everyone, uh, guess on this one.

We did cover random slopes at the last part of the lecture last week.

Hello. So the the important thing is thinking about what this random affects structure is telling us when we look at the equation,

but also when we look at the output of our model.

So there's also something missing here, which is the one plus which we saw in most of our examples we did last week.

However, if we do run this with the one plus or without it, we'll end up getting the same, uh, output so that one plus can be redundant.

It's something that our also assumes by default to give us, uh, this structure.

So what this is telling us is that we are getting random intercepts for subjects and random slopes for days for each subject.

And that's part of why I showed you last week how to inspect the coefficients, where we put our model into that coefficients function.

So you could see that the random effect structure what it was doing.

So what I would recommend for you all as well is to try when if you're if you're working on studying this or practising,

um, these mixed models with different random effect structures, just try different formulations here.

You can see examples at some of the links I shared last week. And look at the coefficients and see how they vary based on how you specify these.

So I don't have an example output to go with this. But we would see is that for each subject, uh, we would have a different uh,

intercept and that the days would have a different, uh, slope for each subject.

All right. This one has, like a full set of output, I believe.

So you should be able to scroll through it, I think, on your device,

this one we're looking at from this output, which of the following options would be true?

Can you also still see the fixed effects on yours? Yeah.

Okay. Even if I fully expand, I can't see them.

All right. About ten more seconds for your answer.

Or guess. All right.

So this one was about the fixed effects. Um, if I could show the full output, that would be useful for me to explain it to you.

Um. I'll come back to it, uh, in a second after we finish the other two.

Then I can, uh, close it and go to the full output. Um, but this does give you an idea of, like, if you were given very little information.

Right? So all we have is this output, and it does tell us at least what the model is.

Um, and then this set of, uh, output that we are should hopefully be comfortable by the time you get to the exam.

But of course, by the time you're doing your own analyses, um, sometimes on an exam, you'll be given more information, right?

Like, what does what do these variables actually mean? Uh, that's also something you could expect to.

Okay, so how about this one? True or false? Growth curve model is a type of mixed effect model.

Just a few more seconds. Where? This one. So the answer would be true in this case.

Um, there are other types of growth models that you could do that we're not doing in this

course that might be related to structural equation models or other things like that,

but growth curve models as we use them are a type of mixed effect, which we'll get into shortly.

And then the last one here is what's the main fixed factor in an unconditional growth curve model besides the intercept.

Okay. About ten more seconds. All right.

What have you got? This one. Right. Time. Time is the main.

Fixed factor in an unconditional growth model. What if this said conditional?

Does anyone know what the answer would be then? If it's a conditional growth model.

It is one of the options up here. Any guesses?

I guess it will be a mystery forever. Uh, it's this main independent variable of interest, but we'll unpack that, uh, shortly.

Does it make sense to look at this? Uh. Output together.

Also, can I expand this? This is just not a great way to look at the results.

So in this case it's also omitting the the p values.

Um, but it is that really high t value here.

So greater than 1.96 which is also related to our decision making criterion.

Um, so this interpretation here about the effect of days with this average increase of 10.47 in reaction time,

which is the output across all subjects.

Um, so that's about making sure you understand how to interpret what a fixed effect is,

to look at this output and remember or integrate that this effect, uh, does relate to this outcome.

The reaction there. And how to interpret this information.

So usually there would be something where if it's asking for which one of these is true, some of the values for example might be correct.

But maybe the interpretation is not correct. Um and so on.

Any questions on these questions? Cool.

So. What I want to cover today is basically what is growth curve modelling.

Give you an example to work with today that's going to be just using a straight line.

Um, and then we're going to talk a bit about polynomials, and I'll give you a short example with that,

which you will then work with polynomials of on this one in your practical exercise this week.

Before we talk about reporting and graphing. So I don't have a lot of slides today about, well, 20, including the 2 or 3 that I already showed.

I think it will take a bit more time for you to run these models, um, and interpret them together.

So I want to save more time for the exercises that we'll do together.

But let's look at what we're doing today. That's different from what we did last week.

So. Here is our generalised formula for the mixed effect model, where it looks just like our regression equation.

Except for we can have these, uh, error terms that allow for random intercepts and slopes.

Again, when we have nested data or repeated observations.

And the repeated observations is the important part here, because with growth modelling we tend to be thinking about time.

So time is explicitly included here. So it's a special case of mixed modelling.

That gets back to that question in the quiz already. The focus is on longitudinal or repeated measures.

We always include time. And this is going to be a predictor of our outcome.

And that's the growth part. And we could expand with polynomials like we covered earlier in the semester to have curves.

So that's where we get the idea of like growth curve modelling.

If we don't have a curve then maybe it's just a growth model. Um, this is maybe a bit more semantic,

but I wanted to point out where these come from and how they will relate to the equations that you specify for your, uh, model.

And the important point here is that, you know, before we were looking at our independent variables and raising them to different polynomials,

to say that, oh, it might take a quadratic or cubic shape, the relationship between your independent and dependent variable.

But now it's actually about, uh, polynomials that we raise our time variable to.

And we're saying over time does that have like a linear increasing trend or is it a quadratic trend over time or some other polynomial.

Right. So when should we use growth curves?

Well when you think something changes over time.

Uh, so an example here is looking at some observed data, uh, how it changes from week to week.

This is a placebo group versus, uh, some type of, uh, treatment.

Um, and when you want to look at sort of does this have an effect over time between these groups.

So this is something that kind of came up in the quiz already where I talked about conditional versus unconditional.

I'll say more on that. Uh, soon. But conditional.

It means that you're actually adding in that independent variable besides time.

So you might have just a model that says over time across all of these two groups, what is the pattern of change?

And then you would add in the conditional. Which would then say, okay, is there a difference in the pattern of change over time between the groups?

That's something that we would really be interested to find.

Otherwise, we wouldn't have had experimental groups or treatment groups or things like that.

This is a more cognitive, science oriented, uh, example on, uh, visual search.

Um, which is not exactly time, but increasing sizes of um sets for this visual search task.

These all come from the, uh, the required reading, by the way, Dan Mormon's, uh, book on growth curve modelling.

Uh, so there's plenty of examples in there on when growth curves might be the way to go.

But if you know already I have repeated observations and there's some regular interval of these observations,

like every day, every week, uh, every minute.

That's already a clue that you might want to consider growth curve modelling.

So our process for building growth curves is sort of like this.

Uh, remember that we've gone from this comparison earlier on, especially in stats one where we just want to compare,

say, the means between group one and group two, or between a few groups.

Um, and now we've transitioned more to a model building framework.

And this really applies a lot here for growth curve modelling.

So we might start with our base model, which is just our outcome variable time and a random intercept for subjects.

If we have uh repeated measures for subjects.

So this is the simplest growth model that we could do.

And it's called unconditional. So there you, you're trying to see what is the pattern of change over time.

If I don't know anything else but this information. And then we want to iteratively build on that to see, uh,

do we get a better fitting model if we add polynomials for time, for example, this would still be unconditional.

But then we could add this variable of interest like, uh, a treatment condition, for example.

And then this now becomes a conditional growth model and conditional.

All that means is that the pattern of change over time is is conditional on the group that you're examining.

So that's that's what we have shown here, for example,

where we will then get a change in the estimate of the growth pattern based on your conditional variable.

In this case it's grouping. But it doesn't have to be. Then we could add interaction terms.

Right. So maybe we're interested in is there an interaction between our conditional variable and the pattern of change over time?

Uh, we might have to test is there, uh, random slopes that we should have added to that model?

Um, so this is this is how we might iteratively build on a unconditional sort of baseline growth model to get to some point where we think that,

um, we have gotten a model that fits our data well.

I'll come back to this point in a little bit as well, that we should, of course,

have maybe a theoretical background, too, of why we think there might be a certain pattern of change over time.

Although I would say from my experience in the research, it's really hard for people to do longitudinal studies.

You know, they take a long time, take a lot of resources. So we just don't see a lot of it.

And therefore, it's also hard to have a strong theory about what patterns of change you might predict over time.

Uh, so that's why we might say, well, no one so far has done a longitudinal study in this area.

They haven't done growth curves in this area. What kind of theory should we have then?

Maybe you have a good hunch based on, you know, something related, but maybe not.

So maybe you have to go through this empirical model building process to see then what is the best fitting model?

I'll come back to that a bit more in a later slide. For now, I want you to to give this a try.

So we are going to work with, uh, some chick weight data.

There is a our data file. Where's my mouse?

I don't know. How about this?

Yeah. So this. Our data file should be on canvas under the modules.

You can load that and then this data set is within there.

You can also, as usual, check out what's even in this data set.

I'll tell you though, of course it has the weight for some baby chickens that are given different diet type.

So there's a variable that tells the diet and there's also a time variable.

This data set does have documentation. So if you go to help in R you can also type this in.

And you can actually see more information about it. Try to make uh your growth curve model.

So start with the unconditional growth curve. Then maybe try a conditional and then maybe try one with the interaction.

I would save all of these three models. You can also inspect the output of them.

Um, also I have here of course, try to make some predictions.

So once you understand the data, how do you think the weight will change over time?

Will there be some effect of the different diet types? Will these interact?

Try to make some prediction before you run this. Um, I will give you some time to do this.

Make sure to save them. We're going to use them again in the next exercise.

Uh, but I'll check in with you shortly to see how it's going.

One other thing, too. You can work with, uh, seamless past server as well.

The link should be on canvas if you want to work on the browser instead of your own local or studio.

If you have any issues with anything with me over and I'll try it out.

It's. Would you put it down?

I. By.

Yeah. That way.

Uh. It might be something like.

This is. Something that.

So we. Uh, kids?

If you. Excuse me.

I want to ask. Old.

It's going to. Stuck out.

So what's the big. You'll see.

So efficient. So. That anyone can get the.

Yeah. Anyone stuck with that?

So. That's.

Would you like a yes or no? Technology.

Oh. It's like you.

Yeah. This is. So the file shouldn't be.

To do something. That's fine. That's a bit.

That's the. Just please.

Yeah. So you think you. I love this.

Yeah. The witnesses.

So. Because you this.

Who they. He was.

Kid was. I think if I see.

So do. This.

So I don't know. Much I.

This was another one of kind. People that are.

So. Maybe if you have an idea where he see.

Be vaccinated. Are you giving?

What we do. First of all.

Let's do a quick vote for today's break duration.

Do we need a full 15 minutes today? No one.

Okay. And early and do ten minutes. Yeah.

Ten minutes. Looks like the most. Five minutes only. I think we'll do ten.

Well, we'll do 11.5. So let's just start back at, uh, at 140, and then we'll go over the, uh, the code for this.

God. They were not.

So. Yeah.

Yeah. So the question is.

I. Yeah, I'll say why we're studying instead of getting into some sort of compilation thing.

All right. That was our, uh, break time. Hopefully you are, uh, well braked and ready for some more growth curve modelling.

So this are a data file. It was a bit of a different we I think we had worked with it before.

Maybe in another module or maybe in stats one.

Um, if you hadn't seen it in a while. Uh, it's actually contains a bunch of different data frames, so it actually just loads like an R workspace.

Um, you could load it like this, or you can click in your R studio, the open open file button, and you could, uh, click on it to load it that way.

And then you would have had a bunch of different data frames show up in your working environment, um, which you could then work with.

So in this case, data check. Wait, if it wasn't showing up, should populated there.

And then I added this to just double check what's in there. Right.

So we have the the weight. So this is a value.

You can check out the documentation and help as well to see more about it.

Uh there's a time of memory measurement. I think this was weeks or something.

Then a chicken identifier number and then a certain diet type.

So this is just from the heading. But if we look at the summary we see there are four diet types.

Not totally balanced. Uh, number of observations.

Um, and we can see a bit of the distribution of the weight and the time and the chicken identifier there.

So let's just take a moment to think about this data set.

Right. So it includes the weight of some chickens.

And if you were maybe a farmer and you wanted to see, okay, I could give my chickens different types of diets and see how well they grow.

Um, that could be a reason why you might want to look at these data.

And then you might just want to say, okay, well, if I don't know anything about the diet,

I'm just looking at across the chickens over time, what sort of the trend?

Right. And if you knew that these were, say, newly hatched chickens, you would probably assume that the trend it would be positive, right?

They're not. They're going to go up in weight. How strong that is.

Maybe that depends. Uh. Has anyone raised any chickens before in here?

No. Some maybe you think partially of you.

Maybe your family has some I don't know I have in myself, but, uh, usually they tend to get bigger, right?

Up to a certain point. Um, why do we have this random effect?

Remember we said when we're thinking about this unconditional model, which means we don't have that sort of key independent variable, just have time.

We still want to account for a random intercept for our subject ID in this case, our subject.

Our subject is just the individual chicken.

And in that example up here we had, uh, multiple observations of the weight per chicken up until time 21 I believe.

So then after this goes further on, we have observations from chicken two, chicken three, and so on.

So we're just going to be pulling out those random intercepts per each chicken ID.

So this is our absolute base unconditional model.

Which I specified here and I called it model dot base, amp base.

Uh, you see this is LMR again. Remember, that's the difference with, uh, mixed models, we can't use just our LM function should be lm,

er, um, here I added diet, so this now becomes a conditional model.

Right? We're adding in diet. Why? Well, this is perhaps something that the person who was doing this research wanted to see.

You know, this was their independent variable in their study.

Let's try out these different diets and see which one, uh, you know, gets the chickens to grow better.

Something like that. So this is why it becomes conditional. Uh, I was talking before with one of you that.

Would you ever have diet as a random effect? Maybe if it was something that you weren't really interested in as the main part of your study, right?

Like if you were trying to look at the relationship between exercise and weight while controlling for variation of certain diet types,

you could possibly have a random effect for that. But in this case, we think it's like the main manipulation.

The main thing we want to see is there a fixed effect for it. So ran this model that way, right.

Weight uh, as a function of time plus diet and then adding in the interaction.

So in this case I just put the asterisks here um, and ran that.

So I saw some of you already looked at the output.

I don't have my output here. Right? I just went to exercise two.

So let's come back to the output in a minute. Were there any questions just on this data set and how I set up these models though.

Makes sense. Well. Okay, so this is more or less the same thing that I just showed you.

Uh, except with some figures that I'll also show you how to make those in a little bit.

Um, so remember I said we're doing this kind of model building approach, and we're not farmers.

At least no one admitted to raising lots of chickens. Uh, so maybe we don't have any idea about what the pattern should be over time?

Should diet and time interact? We also don't know what the diets were, but we could try to check if it is here.

Um. I don't think it's as though.

Yeah. So it says 1 to 4 with experimental diets.

We'd have to read the source paper, perhaps to get more information.

So the reason why I set up these. Three models like this is because I'm now going to do this sort of empirical model comparison, right?

If I had a strong theory, then I would have said from the beginning, oh,

I expect that there's going to be an interaction between the pattern of change over time based on the diet, but I don't have that theory.

But I'm going to compare each of these models. So you already saw last week how we can compare mixed models.

Unfortunately for you, it's not new. We can compare the goodness of fit using the log likelihood function.

The thing is that unlike the R squared, it's not that meaningful.

Uh, to interpret the log likelihood itself. Except for that we know that higher log likelihood is an improvement of fit of the model.

And we use this negative to log likelihood, which follows a chi square distribution to get p values.

And remember these have to be nested models that we're comparing.

So that means that the dependent variable must always be the same.

If you're ever trying to put in multiple models that have a different different dependent variable.

Hopefully you'll get an error. Um, it should give you an error if you do that.

Did any of you already try to compare the models? No one, just mostly looking at the output.

So let me give you just a few minutes then to try to compare your three models.

You can use the Anova function to compare them where you enter all of them at once.

You could also try the test performance from the performance package, although when I tested it, I get a base factor.

Which is not what I want. I want the log likelihood. So it's actually test likelihood.

I think you can check the documentation for the right one.

Then once you see which model is the best fitting model, then I would get the summary of that model and try to interpret it.

If you have time. Try adding random slopes as well and see how that compares to your best fitting model.

In the end, whenever you've gotten to this point where you say, okay, I think this model is the best fitting one,

check your assumptions, make sure they look good, and then see if you can make a plot to help support your interpretation of that model.

I'll give you some amount of time to work on all of these steps before we'll go through these together as well.

And then we'll go over a few slides on the polynomial, uh, additions to this.

And you to. Things that are.

Other. This is.

It's just that it's.

It's like five minutes and five. I mean, it's.

Of course. Also in our first year.

Yeah. I'm a bit stuck here.

Well, it's. That so? Yeah.

Yeah, yeah. You know this.

No. It's just.

Yeah. But why is it so much?

So it's there. You can still do. We have Mitch.

It's. Yeah.

What is? Appreciate.

It's a beautiful. That's what I am.

This. Now there's.

This. You know.

Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's.

Some of the. No, you.

That's insane. That's. Yes.

But at least you can check. To.

I. Yeah, yeah.

I just want to. Let's take a look together now.

And, uh, then we'll go into the adding some polynomials to this.

Uh, before we wrap up, uh, at least five minutes early.

So I wanted to compare the fit of these first three models, right?

So remember I had my base model, which was just that unconditional model that has this random intercept for chicken ID.

Then I had just two separate effects for time and for diet.

And then I had allowed for the interaction between time and diet.

When I do the Anova for these. We can see systematically what were the models being compared.

Right. And then how well they compare in terms of their log likelihood,

which is where these chi squared values are, uh, estimated from, also based on the degrees of freedom.

So we're seeing actually if the log likelihood of these models is better relative to the other ones, in which case we see both the model,

the conditional model and the conditional model with the interaction are better than the prior models,

even though they have more parameters being estimated.

And we also see here still lower AIC as well.

So you would probably conclude, conclude from this that the model within the interaction term is the better fitting model if you just use this.

I also said you could use test performance, but if you did, anyone try it?

Did you get the base factor from that or did you get output like this?

Uh, okay. So for me, for some reason, it defaulted to base.

It's supposed to detect what's the most, like, the right test to do.

So for me, it wasn't. That's why I did mine manually. So test likelihood ratio.

And then we're still getting this chi square test, just like what we had up here.

So why would you do that? Uh, well, I don't know.

Um, if, you know, if you're just trying to stick with in this sort of family of packages, maybe you just do it this way.

Um, here, you get a bit more of these other metrics, too, that you could compare, uh, but both test, uh, give us the same interpretation.

So that's good. Um, if we compare our performance so we could just extract the performance metrics as well and then compare the R squared.

Does anyone remember the difference between the marginal and conditional r squared for mixed models.

I even. Uh, referred.

They include the ransom? Yeah. Yeah.

Thank you. Yeah. So these ones are essentially what the whole model, including the random effects include.

And this is just our fixed effects. Yeah. This is done sometimes.

Are. Less than I did for. Yeah.

Do you think that. Yeah. It works in a different way than.

Can you repeat that? Uh, so when you use, when you construct a model.

Mhm. Just in fact the r squared is different from where you construct the model with random effects that are so powerful r squared.

Whether it's, uh. Adjusted our.

So you mean if you run a multiple regression that doesn't have any random right?

Yeah. Yeah. So yeah. Yeah. So from.

Well, the remember, the multiple regression is violating the assumption of interdependence of the model.

So the R squared getting that you're getting from an LM function is is not reliable when you're violating this interdependence, uh, assumption.

Uh, well, the the equation for how it's calculated for the linear model is the same as we went over for multiple regression.

But here it's different because, uh, I didn't go over that actually.

But I can get some info later on that. Yeah.

Um, but but those would be different because they are calculated differently,

but also because if you calculate that for this data with independence, uh, interdependence, then it won't be accurate anyways.

Yeah. But you can, uh, you can remember as well that these should be just for fixed effects alone.

But again, if you try it with a linear model that doesn't have any random effects,

then you'll get something different because that isn't the right model to run for those.

But good that you checked. Um, we could also look at the ICC.

Remember that that intro class correlation is telling us about, uh, the relationship within our random effects.

Uh, we do want to see some correlation here.

Otherwise, it tells us that the random effect structure we used maybe is not, uh, it's not really that important.

Uh, we could look at the MSI. So which one has the smallest error?

Again that's that looks like it's our M1. I don't know why it's swapped the order here for these.

Uh, that's a bit strange, but, uh, uh, well, we could make the spider plot here as well.

Plot, compare performance. And then we see that the M1, the one with the interaction, also has the best fit.

So now I finally generate my summary. So my thinking was, at least I think this is sort of a reasonable.

Um, set of models to compare which of those fits best.

Then I will interpret the output, because then I'm confident already that if I'm choosing the best fitting model,

that it would be the one to interpret rather than interpreting along the way, you could do it the other way around.

You could just say, what is my unconditional model? Let me interpret that, uh, and go along further.

But I'm just showing you a different way to think about that. So here we have a lot of random effects.

So we have a lot of fixed effects that are significant. We see an effect the intercept being different from zero.

We see a positive effect for time.

So that's going to be you know, some increase uh and in the chicken weight over time we see all of these other variables.

So what you should know is that this was a factor and our treats are dummy are factors as dummy coded which is why we don't see diet one.

So everything that we learned about dummy coding before applies here.

That these changes are relative to the referent group which would be diet one.

And then the interaction terms here. Also, I'll end up being significant.

But to interpret interactions. Remember we had that whole module on interpreting them.

I would of course say the best thing here is actually to come up with a plot that shows you the predicted pattern for each diet type over time.

And I'll show you that in a second. I will also remind you that if you are struggling to interpret your output,

you could always use the report function to at least get an auto generated interpretation.

I usually use this to, uh, to double check.

Did I interpret it correctly?

So maybe I will generate I will interpret it first, then I will generate the summary and see if it's consistent with what I thought.

Again this may not always be accurate.

Uh, hopefully it is though. Uh, and it wouldn't be typically the way you would report it yourself.

And, and uh, in a scientific paper, it has some of the parts there, but the writing is not, uh, the most interpretable.

Um, let me show you my plot before I come back to this.

So I ended up using ggplot with my chicken weight by time, by weight, and adding a colour for diet.

Um, and adding means and standard error to these points.

Uh, before then adding the fitted values of my best fitting model here and giving it a certain, uh, colour palette.

So I would say if you could. Generate your results and then have a figure to go with them.

It's pretty clear here what the pattern is, right? That all of the chickens increase in weight on average over time, and this varies by diet type.

So if you were a farmer trying to choose which diet to choose to give your chickens, which one would you choose?

Anyone? Uh, maybe just a quick vote. Would you go for number one?

Two. Three.

For. Everyone's going for three.

So you want these chickens that end up with the biggest at the end, I guess.

Um, of course, maybe you would be thinking, oh, well,

I would maybe want to know how much it costs or what am I feeding them, uh, or something that's even longer term.

Like, not just what gives us the biggest chickens, but the healthiest ones.

Um, but of course, we don't have that information. If you are really just trying to look at where they end up.

You would see that it looks like diet three, uh, ends up on average to be, uh, they have a steeper slope, so they gain weight more quickly.

Um, compared to the other ones. But the standard error bars are overlapping at the end.

So it could be that, um, at the end, it's not really different than diet for for example,

I would maybe want to go in and then compare that as well to be confident in that.

Um, so I also just tried adding random slopes for time here.

So this was just like in the, uh, the quiz question today.

Putting time here on the left side of the vertical bar.

Keeping the one plus there. Remember are will interpret it the same whether you have that or not.

Um, and then this will give us, uh, a model that actually fails to converge for me.

Um, which, uh, means that it's, uh, difficult to estimate, uh, the parameters, although it still gives you something.

Uh, but that, to me, it's a warning. It's not an error.

If I was running this analysis myself, I would probably try.

I would probably just go with the simpler model.

Um, otherwise I would try different convergence optimisers, which is beyond the scope of what we're covering.

But of course, you can always copy your warning into a search engine, uh, and see what's recommended to figure out what to do about that.

But but I wanted to include it here because it's quite likely, especially if you're going with, uh, maximal approach that we talked about last week.

And we'll come up again shortly that you will get convergence issues.

And again, usually my approach is to go with the simpler model that has still a very good fit.

Although as you saw here, if you run this, it gives a convergence issue but then does still say it is a better fit.

And if we look at the output, it's pretty similar, although there's a bit of different effects.

Now the diet three has got a significant effect.

This one has become non-significant, so I would be a bit concerned about what's going on with this.

Uh, random slopes for a time.

But so because of the convergence issue, ISO said, please check my assumptions for model one.

There was a bit of something here with, uh, linearity, um, and uh, homogeneity that looked a bit off, but not very bad.

Um, but you can also do this manually, which I wanted to show you as well today.

So rather than relying on the plot, which we saw in some cases can be difficult to generate.

You could check them manually and get some information there as well.

Okay. There's no exercise through today due to time, and you'll work on that in the practical.

So. What do I want to say here?

Uh, basically that. You can compare your models.

You should interpret your output and a good figure, especially for growth curve models, really goes a long way.

And showing that pattern, I think for many of you, maybe when you just looked at these coefficients,

you see whether they're positive or negative, whether they're significant or not.

But when I show you this, then it's much more clear how to interpret those effects.

Now you can change this. Right. So we just had a linear pattern of change over time.

Overall, it seemed all right. We could do everything we did with polynomials in these models.

Again, just expanding our time variable to be a polynomial.

There's some advantages of this. Like we can basically model any pattern of change.

Um, although we need to ensure that that model that we get is the.

Uh, average of the individual models.

So that's why we might then look at those individual coefficients, uh, and make sure that those are matching the overall output of the model.

Keep in mind that we can't extrapolate outside our observed time window.

So this is important. This is the same with, uh, the polynomial regression that we did before.

But it's not forecasting. Right. So we're only training a model on our observed data.

Uh, even if we saw something like a, uh, uh, quadratic curve like this, you might be tempted to say,

oh, well, if I plug in the values out here, uh, then I would expect, you know, something over here.

Um, but but growth models are they're usually not recommended to project outside the time

window that you might want to use a forecasting algorithm or something like that.

So here's that, uh, thing about how to choose polynomial order, whether that's statistical,

like we kind of went through today comparing the improvement of fit based on adding higher order

polynomials and where does it not improve fit or theoretical or just trying up to fourth order?

Because usually most things are not higher than fourth order.

And we can still do orthogonal polynomials here.

So this shows you an example for a growth curve modelling how the orthogonal polynomials will still capture these trends.

They do transform the values though making the direct interpretation harder.

But they can reduce some correlation between the variables.

That might be problematic.

Now, as with our normal, uh, polynomial regression, it can be challenging to interpret directly our, uh, polynomial terms.

I've included this figure from the from the presentation of the author.

Um, to give you, like a rule of thumb, interpretation of the coefficients for each higher, uh, order polynomial term.

But again, the best way is really to simulate sorry two you could simulate them, which I have on the next slide, but also just to plot them.

So in this case you can see for example, uh increasing strength coefficients for linear, quadratic,

cubic and quartic terms and how the increases in those coefficients sort of changes the, uh,

the strength of either the slope of the line, if it's the linear term, the steepness of the quadratic curve,

uh, the multiple points, like the strength of the inflection points here for cubic and quartic.

Right. So that gives you some intuition at least about how to interpret them, although it's going to be relative to your data set.

But but if you found for example.

A conditional model where you saw that there was an interaction between your cubic term and your conditional variable,

and one was stronger than the other. Then you could still use this as a reference to sort of interpret.

Okay, well, the less this lesser coefficient, you know, has maybe a more flattened S curve, whereas the steeper one is more strong.

Okay. I have to skip kind of quickly through the last few slides to get to some wrap up points.

It's recommended to do the maximal approach. I said more on this last week.

So you can just, uh, follow that advice here.

Um, there is an example here on interpreting.

Conditioned by time effects, which is something that would be.

Um, excuse me, very interesting for, uh, these types of analyses.

An example right up, which you can read on your own time, how you would, uh,

write up the analysis that is also, uh, in the text and plotting a nice figure.

Uh, that as well shows sort of like a growth curve with polynomials that that illustrates this change in the pattern there.

So I have one last slide. Um, so for wrapping up the course, please do complete your last practical exercise.

Again, to make sure that you understand how to do these growth curve models.

Next week we will have an exam Q&A session.

Uh, so we will meet I have a couple of slides to wrap up the course mentioned things that we've covered.

Uh, and answer any questions that you will have from the for the exam.

Uh, there's an update in your timetable, so we will meet at 130.

We'll just have an hour. Uh, usually we don't use all of the time anyways.

Keep a keep an eye on canvas for the exam study guide.

I would say make sure to check this study guide before the Q&A session, so that you can come prepared with questions for that session.

If no one has any questions. Then I will say, nice to see you.

I guess there's no questions. Uh, have a nice day. So do come prepared.

Uh, and I'm happy to go over any of the other material that you want to refresh on.

Okay. See some of you later today. And.

I want to say that I really think. It's unfortunate for me.

You know, I know so well that. What. I can for some of y'all.

Yeah. So I have this also. If I was to decide if I would use that as this opportunity.

I can tell you that I need to be honest with you.

You know, at. The. End of August or.

I guess I should wait for this one.

I know it will be honest and there is a year on booked out.

We actually have one chapter as a supplement for this work, but it covers the generalised.

So we talked about creating instance three. But.

I also wanted to ask if maybe there are some research assistantships opportunities for student opportunities,

because I've looked into some of the research that you would have done.

And I found. That they could actually understand, for example, that you cognitivism learning slightly under the dynamic theory.

I actually really like these things.

Uh, what does that mean? Uh, so, uh, that that's really.

Yeah. So right now I don't have any decisions, but they use those discussions very often.

So what I will do, the answer to that question would be possible for themselves to see.

So you can see it. Yeah. I of your mind?

Yeah, I would do that. And I would also just have.

I mean, we could also think of things that we don't have funding, things that you could get started with.

I would appreciate. Against.

This is. Would to that doozy.

Enthusiastic about. I really want to contribute.

Contributing. Being mentioned in the paper.

I just wanted to. A part of something.

Something. Yes, that's. Well, that's, uh.

Yes. We'll find something there. Okay.

I'm sure it'll be on. Of course.

Of course. You will need to have at least eight out of ten to be able to make five.

Yes. Without skipping the. Oh, you're not sorry.

Can you repeat that? If you need to have a face, um.

Greet it. No, no, it's not like an entrance.

Okay, so it's. If you have, you know, there's ten completed.

Yeah. Okay. Great. For eight out of ten. Okay. Uh, but if you don't have a ten, your grade for the practicals.

Just based on how. Okay. And then I suppose maybe I have to submit a common.

